# 3. SANS ICS Assessment Quick Start Guide v1.2 09.30.21


---
*Page 1*


## ICS
## Assessment
## Q U I C K - S T A R T  G U I D E

## This ICS Assessment Quick Start
## Guide provides a basic starting
## point for industrial control system
## (ICS) assessments that can be
## applied to all ICS sectors.
## Concentrating on several primary
## risk areas, this content aims to
## help organizations identify
## opportunities to improve newly
## established ICS security programs.

## ics.sans.org

## Data Gathering

Begin the assessment by gathering information
about the organization, industrial process, existing security
controls, network architecture, policies and standards, and the
organization’s information attack space and threat landscape.

•  Company OSINT—Conduct an open-source intelligence
(OSINT) exercise. This involves gathering publicly available
information using tools such as Google, Shodan, LinkedIn,
etc. to learn what adversaries likely already know about
your organization, operations, and Internet-connected
devices. It is important to at least be aware of what
information is publicly available, and then work to reduce
it moving forward.

•  Policies, Procedures, Security Controls—If security controls
and governance were leveraged from IT, review and ensure
that what is being produced or in place has been adapted to
suit ICS-specific needs across ICS security controls, processes,
and procedures in order to prioritize availability and the
safety of engineering assets and operations.

•  Network and Traffic Flow Diagrams—Review and verify that
network architecture represents “as built” documentation
with production network traffic, core network devices,
services, and expected protocols. Services and protocols
that are not required should be disabled through the
hardening process to reduce attack surfaces.

•  Asset Inventory—Generate discussions around which
assets and applications are deemed critical to the process.
If asset inventories are updated regularly – usually in a
database with details on the hardware and software
installed in the control network – they can be used with
threat intelligence to drive proactive defensive operational
changes and threat hunting.

## Physical Walk-Through

The assessment team needs to understand the
physical process that is being assessed.

•  Safety Training—Most industrial sites require all personnel
to complete safety training and wear personal protective
equipment (PPE) before entering a site. Plan time for these
tasks prior to arriving at a site.

•  Physical Security—Physical security breaches can lead to
cyber incidents. Document the scope of physical security
and understand the related security controls deployed.
Start with the front gate: observe authentication processes,
tailgating opportunities, unlocked gates, doors propped
open, fences with gaps, etc.

•  Process Walk-Through with Teams—Physically walk through
the site to understand the industrial process. Include
process control engineers, network and security architects,
field technicians, programmers, operators, managers, and
facility owners. Start a discussion around what an
impactful control system event would look like and how it
could occur. Leverage the physical safety culture by
drawing parallels between physical safety and ICS
cybersecurity case studies.

•  Asset Inventory Updates —Carefully inspect control and
network cabinets to understand what technologies,
hardware, and applications are deployed. Basic attributes to
record include the site name, location, facility type, asset
type and tag, description of asset function, impact on
operations if unavailable, IP and MAC address, ICS protocols
in use, model/manufacturer, serial number, firmware
version, and applications installed and their versions. Merge
and verify newly captured information with existing
inventories in a scalable, searchable, and secured database.

## Network Defense

Verify whether the Purdue Enterprise Reference
Architecture Model is being followed. The Purdue Model suggests
how to segment devices and systems within the control network
based on levels. Each level can help establish a security
enforcement boundary for separation and protection. These
levels create natural points in a network to enable logging,
network security monitoring, and enforcement of access control,
and to assist with containment in incident response.

•  Level 5—Internet, Cloud Services

•  Level 4—Enterprise IT Business Systems

•  Level 3—ICS Plant Site-Wide SCADA Controls

•  Level 2—Local Supervisory, HMI, Engineering Workstations

•  Level 1—Process Control, Field Devices

•  Level 0—Sensors, Hardware Actuators

The following should be considered when assessing the security
of each Level.

•  Network Boundaries—Start with corporate network firewalls,
control network firewalls, and demilitarized zones to ensure
proper organization of assets at each level. Lower levels will
have fewer network restrictions due to process requirements,
yet should still be hardened. Only required services, ports, and
protocols used for operations should be enabled.

•  Wireless Networks—Cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and other
proprietary wireless connectivity can be used for critical
communication channels between remote sites to acquire
telemetry data and to send and receive control commands.
Sweep for wireless networks beyond just Wi-Fi and verify
network boundaries and access controls.

## Security Configuration

Risk is significantly reduced by implementing a
few basic access control concepts. Focus assessment
efforts here first, and include physical security and
related physical access systems.

•  Windows Active Directory—The ICS Active Directory (AD)
should not have trusted relationships or trusted forests
with the corporate IT AD. Corporate AD and ICS AD
credentials should be different. Review Windows Group
Policy configurations to understand how security
controls are implemented across Windows servers and
workstations in ICS.

•  Network, Application, File Shares—Review core
network and system access, including core network
appliances, field devices, web applications, HMIs, Data
Historian applications, etc. Default vendor credentials
should have been changed prior to go-live,
authentication should be used where feasible, and
logging should be enabled. Networked devices should
be hardened. Review networked file shares to
understand what types of sensitive information is
stored on them and how it is accessed and protected.
File shares and services not strictly required should be
disabled to reduce attack surfaces.

•  Remote Access—Review remote connectivity
technologies, remote user accounts, and processes used
by employees, vendors/integrators, and managed
service providers. Ensure proper access control following
the principle of least privilege, and ensure that multi-
factor authentication and secure channels are in place.
The use of a jump host for remote access is a common
security concept to allow for controlled ingress/egress,
monitoring of remote connections, and logging.

## Active Defense Capabilities

Regular review of security events involving key assets
can aid cyber investigations and engineering root cause
analysis, and enable proactive threat hunting capabilities.
Review security event log and monitoring capabilities by starting
with the network, followed by critical endpoints and then field
devices. Follow up by reviewing how logs are consolidated,
correlated, and tuned by human defenders within Security
Information and Event Management (SIEM). Use the following
points to generate discussion:

•  Network Security Monitoring—Monitoring of the network can be
accomplished via a TAP or SPAN. A SPAN may be configured with
existing technology if supported. The installation of a TAP may require
a network outage. Full or partial (5-tuple) packet captures will be
options for network collection. Understand which method of traffic
collection is deployed or possible in the environment.

•  Servers, End Points—Whitelisting anti-malware solutions can be
more effective than traditional IT signature or heuristics-based
solutions. Critical assets to review first include but are not limited
to Data Historians, Human Machine Interface (HMI), Active
Directory Domain Controller, and Engineering Workstations.

•  Field Devices—Field devices such as Remote Terminal Units (RTUs),
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs), and other critical engineering
assets may not have logging enabled by default. Review field device
logging capabilities. Forward security event and device change logs to
a SIEM for central management and event correlation. In some cases,
older field device firmware can be updated to expand or enable
logging capabilities.

•  Repeatable Process—Effective active defense requires dedicated
human defenders trained in ICS security and the control environment
– regularly reviewing critical network events and system logs for
suspicious activity.

## Vulnerability Assessment

Interacting with any ICS always requires that you first consider the
impact on the safety of workers in facilities and the reliability of operations.
Review existing vulnerabilities in the control environment by selecting a
method that is safe and feasible based on safety and on the scope of the
assessment, including testing where needed.

•  General Security Assessment—This is a paper-based assessment of a system
that documents attack surfaces and lists system inputs that could be used by
a threat actor to compromise an asset or network. The assessment generates
insightful discussion points such as hardening and least privilege and
identifies areas for further assessment. It poses a low risk to operations.

•  Vulnerability Scanning—This process uses technical assessment tools to
determine how threat actors may target and attack the organization and
control network. It will produce technical listings of security weaknesses and
related technical remediation steps. Vulnerability scanning poses a medium
risk to operations if uncontrolled or not tested prior to being carried out.

•  Penetration Testing—This involves executing exploits live against system
weaknesses to demonstrate risks of discovered vulnerabilities in deployed
assets, services, and software. Penetration testing will change systems and
has high potential for impacting operations if not conducted in an extremely
careful manner. Penetration testing can pose a high risk to operations if
uncontrolled or not validated in a lab or test environment.

## SANS ICS Community Forum

### Join the SANS ICS Community Forum.

Tips, tricks, and Q&A to secure your ICS:
https://ics-community.sans.org/signup

### ICS410:	 ICS/SCADA Security Essentials

Global Industrial Cyber Security Professional (GICSP)

### ICS456:	 Essentials for NERC Critical
### Infrastructure Protection

GIAC Critical Infrastructure Protection (GCIP)

### ICS515:	 ICS Visibility, Detection,
### and Response

GIAC Response and Industrial Defense (GRID)

### ICS612:	 ICS Cyber Security In-Depth

SANS ICS CURRICULUM

### ics.sans.org

### ics-community.sans.org/signup

### @SANSICS

Free and open-source tools for ICS available at
### ControlThings.io

SANS ICS
RESOURCES

ICSPS_v1.2_09-21
This poster was created by Dean C. Parsons. ©2021 Dean C. Parsons. All Rights Reserved.

---
*Page 2*


## ICS
## Security
## Program
## Maturity

## This guide covers the basics of using the National
## Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cyber
## Security Framework (CSF) in order to understand the
## maturity of a security program implemented to protect
## control environments from any industrial control sector.
## www.nist.gov/cyberframework

## This process concentrates on seven NIST CSF function
## categories to help leadership, engineers, and administrators
## gauge the maturity of the current program and prioritize risk
## reduction. Tracking a metric for maturity in each area will
## help guide your efforts and increase engagement as you
## work to increase the maturity of your program.

## Maturing an ICS
## Security Program
Obtain executive buy-in for
internal security program review

Identify key personnel from IT/ICS/OT/
InfoSec/physical security and form team

Review NIST CSF functions with team
to educate and agree on approach

Provide honest grade for current maturity
for each NIST CSF function and category

Use results to prioritize efforts and actions
and present approach to leadership

Brief leadership and stakeholders
to obtain support and guidance

Brief IT/ICS/OT/InfoSec/physical
security team members on efforts

Set and accomplish
achievable goals, repeat

## ID   Policies

Standards, guidelines, and procedures built from corporate policies are not
implementable within the control network without careful analysis of a number of
considerations. The NIST Special Publication 800-82 Revision 2 Guide to Industrial
Control Systems (ICS) Security outlines many of these considerations.

Organizations can develop control network policies by starting with and adapting
current corporate policies. Customizing policies to account for the unique requirements
of control environments will help the team understand the organization’s business
and operation requirements and allow it to build sound standards, guidelines, and
procedures to ensure the availability, resiliency, and safety of the process.

Providing guidance for each of the NIST CSF functions and categories is a good
beginning. The control network team can use this guidance to identify the standards,
guidelines, and procedures it should develop for each area. The team can leverage
the NIST 800-82 Revision 2 publication to guide its conversation and development.

## PR   Incident Response
## Table Top Scenarios

Teams can walk through, discuss, create, and/or simulate the sample IR tabletop
scenarios listed below to validate existing controls and help prepare for an
incident. There are no wrong answers. The gaps identified should be
documented and addressed.

Example IR Table Top Scenarios:

•  Ransomware—An operator logs into the asset management server and sees a
ransomware note on the desktop background and discovers that all project
files appear to be encrypted.

•  Maintenance or Compromise—An administrator account is observed logging
into all Windows servers and workstations across the control network.

•  Strange HMI Activity—Operators notice the mouse cursor moving and clicking
on different portions of the HMI that are not consistent with normal operations.

•  Living off the Industrial Control Security Land—Operators troubleshooting
network issues notice excessive ICS protocol traffic (OPC, IEC104, Modbus/TCP)
from several systems.

•  Unauthorized Physical Access—The physical security team notices forced entry
into a building. The team investigates and determines that several control
cabinets were opened and closed.

## RS   Incident Response

Incident response (IR) plans and procedures specific to operational
technology (OT) are necessary to help organize and guide IT, ICS, InfoSec, and
OT teams to success during these stressful events.

It is important to assess currently documented procedures to investigate
suspicious activity, respond to a compromise, and support the recovery
process. Understanding your organization’s level of IR maturity requires a
review of the preparation measures already in place.

•  Roles and Responsibilities—Who is in charge and which team members are
responsible for IT, InfoSec, and OT actions?

•  Key Team Member Contact List—Is an up-to-date call list maintained and does
it include multiple contact methods and identify secondary points of contact?

•  War Room/Conference Line—Is there a standard location and/or conference
call setup for organizing the response team?

•  Vendor/Integrator/MSP Assistance—Are there agreements with these parties
to assist with the response efforts?

•  Third-Party Assistance—Have teams (e.g., forensics, OT IR experts) that
provide staff augmentation during IR events been identified, and are
agreements in place?

•  Jump Bag—Is the set of systems and tools (hardware, software, storage)
necessary to interact with the different technologies in the control network
in place?

•  IR Triage Team—Is there a dedicated team familiar with the control network
and the tools and training needed to conduct information gathering and
forensic analysis, and to provide actionable intelligence to the IR team?

•  Table Top Scenarios (TTX)—Have IR scenarios that include IT/InfoSec/OT/
Physical Security team members been run to train individuals on their roles
and responsibilities and identify gaps in IR procedures?

CRITICAL NOTE: Due to plant and public safety requirements, compromised
control networks may stay operational for weeks or months. During this time,
IR efforts will continue in a contained and controlled state with increased
monitoring and vigilant control. Full eradication may occur only during the next
scheduled plant maintenance window or similar event.

## DE   Logging and Monitoring

Logging and monitoring within the control network is most effective when prioritized
to collect network events first and then system events. Collected data should then be
consolidated, correlated, and evaluated for events that provide actionable
intelligence. The following are prioritized starting points for this discussion:

## PR   Network Segmentation
## and Isolation

•  Network Boundaries—Network segmentation and isolation begin with network
boundaries between the corporate network and the control network.

•  Remote Access—Make remote access secure and available for operators,
engineers, integrators, vendors, managed service providers (MSP), and others
crossing these boundaries.

•  Internet Access—There is always a path to the Internet, so it is critical to
understand and periodically review and assess this path.

•  Cloud Access—Vendors and integrators are increasingly leveraging cloud access
for maintenance and management, so systems communicating with the cloud
should be isolated from other control systems wherever possible.

## PR   Access Control

Control networks have unique requirements for management by company personnel
and third-party partners.

•  Control Network Credentials—These credentials should be unique to the control
environment. The control network Active Directory (AD) should not have a trust
relationship, nor should it synchronize with corporate domains.

•  Multi-Factor Authentication—Like Windows AD, MFA should not be shared with the
corporate environment and should be required, at a minimum, for all remote access.

•  Vendors and Integrators—Third-party accounts should be restricted to specific
roles, responsibilities, and assets. MFA should be required. A jump server should be
used to avoid direct connections from the Internet to control system servers.

•  Managed Service Providers (MSPs)—Many organizations share MSP services
between the corporate and control networks. MFA should be required.  A jump
server should be used to avoid direct connections to control system servers from
outside the control network.

•  Service Accounts—Service accounts are used for many applications and should not
share credentials between the corporate and control networks.

CRITICAL NOTE: Monitoring the use of credentials and MFA is the most important
step to ensure that access control is an effective security control.

## Initiating an ICS Security Program

Obtain Leadership
Support

•  Identify stakeholders

•  Define scope

Build the Team

•  Best teams have a mix of IT,
OT, ICS, and InfoSec

•  Having dedicated ICS team
is more important than
reporting structure

Identify Requirements
and Risk

•  Regulatory requirements

•  Architectural, business,
and vulnerability risks

•  Inventory, audit, and
assess

Establish Policy and
Procedures

•  Consider best practices

•  Defense-in-Depth

•  Awareness Programs

Execute and Maintain

•  Regularly analyze
previous steps

•  Follow agile lifecycle
models rather than
waterfall models

## ID   Asset Inventory
## Management

Asset inventory management is one of the most important and challenging
categories for all organizations. Asset identification can be accomplished using four
methodologies: Physical Inspection, Passive Monitoring, Active Monitoring, and
Configuration Analysis. Device categories include (but are not limited to):

•  Control Hardware (PLCs, Field Devices)

•  Network Devices

•  Servers and Workstations

•  Process Control Software

•  Other Software

•  Other IT and Internet of Things Devices

•  Transient Systems and Devices

•  Removable Media Devices

## ID  Identify

## PR  Protect

## DE  Detect  

## RS  Respond

## PR   Security Awareness

Corporate security awareness programs
traditionally focus on users accessing corporate
assets or services such as email, financial systems,
and the Internet. Industrial control system security
awareness programs focus primarily on the safety
of people, the system, and physical security.

To strengthen the resilience and availability
of safety and processes, it is important for
workers, operating in both OT and IT
environments, to complete basic training
and review content from both OT and IT
security awareness training programs.

Furthermore, IT, InfoSec, OT, and physical security personnel
who have control network responsibilities should receive
training on control network policies and on their individual
responsibilities. That training should also teach them how to
identify suspicious activity and encourage them to report the
activity as a part of their normal response and recovery steps.

•  Network Events
-  IP Flow Information Export (IPFIX)
-  Network Boundary Activity
-  Network Device Monitoring
Configurations
(Span port and physical taps)
-  Network Security Monitoring

•  Managed Logging and Monitoring
-  Central Logging Windows
-  Central Logging Syslog
-  Security Operations Center Monitoring and Alerting

•  System Events
-  Windows Active Directory Events
-  DNS Events
-  Windows Event Logs
-  Syslog Events
(*nix systems, PLCs, Field Devices)

## SANS ICS Community Forum

### Join the SANS ICS Community Forum.

Tips, tricks, and Q&A to secure your ICS: https://ics-community.sans.org/signup

## ics.sans.org
ICSPS_v1.2_09-21
This poster was created by Don C. Weber. ©2021 Don C. Weber. All Rights Reserved.