# 36. Network Forensics Poster


---
*Page 1*


## Network Source Data Types

## Network Source Data Collection Platforms

While full-packet capture is often collected strategically as a component
of a continuous monitoring program or tactically during incident
response actions, it is often too large to process natively. Instead, distill
pcap ﬁles to other formats for more practical analysis. This offers the
best of both worlds – fast analysis against the distilled source data, while
retaining the original pcap ﬁle for in-depth analysis and extraction.

## P
## F
## L

## Network-Based
## Processing Workﬂows

Although there is no single workﬂow to exhaustively
perform network forensic analysis, the most common
and beneﬁcial tasks can generally be placed into the categories
below. Note that these categories are not generally iterative. They are
components of a dynamic process that can adapt to adversaries’ actions.

## Zeek NSM Log Files

The Zeek Network Security
Monitoring platform produces
numerous log ﬁles containing useful
artifacts extracted from the source
pcap data. These logs can be in
tab-separated value (TSV) or JSON
format.  TSV logs beneﬁt from the
“zeek-cut” utility and JSON logs
can be parsed with the “jq” utility.
Note that not all log ﬁles will be
created – Zeek only generates log
ﬁles that pertain to source trafﬁc it
has parsed. This is not an exhaustive
list of logs – see more info at
for572.com/zeek-logs.

The lightweight “passivedns” utility creates text records
that detail DNS queries and responses. This format is ideal
for searching for activity across multiple protocols, as
most software (good or evil) makes DNS requests before
initiating a network connection. These logs can also be
easily parsed by a SIEM or log aggregator such as SOF-ELK.

Ingest and Distill

GOAL:  Prepare for analysis and derive data that
will more easily facilitate the rest of the
analytic workﬂow

• Log source data according to local procedure

•  If pcap ﬁles are available, distill to other data source
types (NetFlow, Zeek logs, Passive DNS logs, etc.)

•  Consider splitting source data into time-based chunks if
the original source covers an extended period of time

•  Load source data to large-scale analytic platforms such
as SOF-ELK, Arkime, etc.

Switch

A port mirror is a “software tap” that duplicates packets sent to or from
a designated switch port to another switch port. This is sometimes called a “SPAN port.”
The mirrored traﬃc can then be sent to a platform that performs collection or analysis,
such as full-packet capture or a NetFlow probe.

Beneﬁts

• Activating a port mirror generally requires just a conﬁguration change, usually avoiding downtime.

•  Switch presence at all levels of a typical network topology maximizes ﬂexibility of capture/
observation platform placement.

Drawbacks

• Data loss is possible with high-traﬃc networks, as bandwidth is limited to half-duplex speed.

Tap

A network tap is a hardware device that provides duplicated packet
data streams that can be sent to a capture or observation platform connected to it. An
“aggregating” tap merges both directions of network traﬃc to a single stream of data
on a single port, while others provide two ports for the duplicated data streams – one in
each direction. A “regenerating” tap provides the duplicated data stream(s) to multiple
physical ports, allowing multiple capture or monitoring platforms to be connected.

Beneﬁts

• Purpose-built to duplicate traﬃc – truly the best case for network traﬃc capture.

•  Engineered for performance and reliability. Most taps will continue to pass monitored traﬃc even
without power, although they will not provide the duplicated data stream.

Drawbacks

• Can be very expensive, especially at higher network speeds and higher-end feature sets.

• Unless a tap is already in place at the point of interest, downtime is typically required to install one.

Layer 2-7 Devices

Any platform with control of or purview over a network link can
provide valuable logging data regarding the communications that pass through or by it.
These may be network infrastructure devices like switches, routers, ﬁrewalls, and a variety
of layer 7 devices such as web proxies, load balancers, DHCP and DNS servers, and more.
Endpoints may also be conﬁgured to generate full-packet capture data or to export NetFlow.

Beneﬁts

• Many perspectives on the same incident can yield multiple useful data points about an incident.

Drawbacks

•  Log data may include numerous formats and varying levels of detail in their contents. This may
require labor-intensive parsing and analysis to identify the useful details.

•  Platforms that create the logs are often scattered across the enterprise – logically and physically.
This requires a sound log aggregation plan and platform – or a lot of manual work.

Router

Routers generally provide NetFlow export functionality, enabling ﬂow-based
visibility with an appropriate collector.

Beneﬁts

•  Infrastructure is already in place, again just requiring a conﬁguration modiﬁcation and little to no
downtime.

•  Many organizations already collect NetFlow from their routing infrastructures, so adding an
additional exporter is usually a straightforward process.

Drawbacks

• Routers don’t generally provide the ability to perform full-packet capture.

Reduce and Filter

GOAL:  Reduce large input data volume to a
smaller volume, allowing analysis with a
wider range of tools

•  Reduce source data to a more manageable volume using
known indicators and data points

•  Initial indicators and data points may include IP
addresses, ports/protocols, time frames, volume
calculations, domain names and hostnames, etc.

•  For large-scale analytic platforms, build ﬁlters to reduce
visible data to traﬃc involving known indicators

Scope and Scale

GOAL:  Search more broadly within source
data for behavior that matches known
indicators

•  After identifying useful artifacts that deﬁne activity
of interest, scale up the search using large-scale
analytic platforms and tools

•  Identify additional endpoints that exhibit the
suspicious behavior, aiming to fully scope the
incident within the environment

•  Pass appropriate indicators to security operations
for live identiﬁcation of suspicious activity

Establish Baselines

GOAL:  Identify parameters for “normal” patterns
of behavior to help ﬁnd anomalies that
need to be investigated

•  Determine typical cycles of traﬃc, top-talking hosts,
ports/protocols, GET vs POST ratio for HTTP activity, etc.

•  Build all baselines for multiple periods – most metrics
have diﬀerent cycles for daily, weekly, monthly, and
annual time frames

•  Consider the levels within the organization at which the
baselines should be built – enterprise-level rollups will
generally diﬀer from those at lower levels

Analyze and Explore

GOAL:  Identify traﬃc and artifacts that support investigative
goals and hypotheses

•  Within the reduced data set, seek knowledge about the suspicious traﬃc

•  This may include evaluating traﬃc contents, context, anomalies,
consistencies – anything that helps to clarify its relevance to the
investigation

•  Seek any protocol anomalies that could indicate traﬃc being misused for
suspicious purposes

•  Use any available environmental baselines to identify deviations from
normal traﬃc behaviors

Extract Indicators and Objects

GOAL: Find artifacts that help identify malicious activity, including ﬁeld values,
byte sequences, ﬁles, or other objects

•  As additional artifacts are identiﬁed, maintain an ongoing collection of these data points
for further use during and after the investigation

•  These may include direct observations from within the network traﬃc or ancillary
observations about the nature of the communications – related DNS activity, before/after
events, etc.

•  Extracting ﬁles and other objects such as certiﬁcates or payloads can help feed other parts of
the IR process such as malware reverse engineering and host-based activity searches

•  Protect this data according to local policies and share in accordance with appropriate
operational security constraints

File Metadata
files.log

•  File metadata such as hash, MIME type, and more for all ﬁles observed,
via any protocol
x509.log

•  Certiﬁcate metadata for SSL and TLS connections

Special Cases
signatures.log

•  Events that match content signatures Zeek has been directed to search for

•  Not a replacement for an IDS, but often useful for targeted searching
weird.log

• Protocol anomalies that Zeek did not expect

•  Includes events such as unrequested DNS responses, TCP truncations, etc.

Inventory
known_hosts.log

•  A list of IP client addresses that have
been observed completing at least
one TCP handshake
known_services.log

•  List of server IP addresses and ports
that have been observed providing at
least one TCP handshake, including
the protocol (if available)
software.log

•  List of software identiﬁed operating
within the source data

•  Generally extracted from server
banners or client ﬁelds such as the
HTTP User-Agent

Network Protocols

conn.log
• TCP/UDP/ICMP connections
• A NetFlow-like view of traﬃc

dns.log
• DNS artifacts, including queries and responses
• A form of passive DNS logs in the Zeek format

http.log
•  HTTP artifacts, including URLs, User-Agents,
Referrers, MIME types, and many others

rdp.log
• Remote Desktop Protocol artifacts

smtp.log
• SMTP (email sending and relaying) artifacts

## PassiveDNS
## Log Format

## Distilling Full-Packet
## Capture Source Data

Full-Packet Capture (pcap)

pcap ﬁles contain original packet data as seen at
the collection point. They can contain partial or
complete packet data.

Beneﬁts

•  Often considered the “holy grail” of network data
collection, this data source facilitates deep analysis
long after the communication has ended.

•  Countless tools can read from and write to pcap ﬁles,
giving the analyst many approaches to examine them
and extract relevant information from them.

Drawbacks

•  These ﬁles can grow extremely large – tens of
terabytes of pcap data can be collected each day from a
1Gbps link. This scale often makes analysis challenging.

•  Legal constraints often limit availability of this source
data. Such constraints are also complicated when an
organization crosses legal jurisdictions.

•  Encrypted communications are increasingly used,
rendering full-packet capture less useful for low-level
analysis.

Log Files

Log ﬁles are perhaps the most widely-used
source data for network and endpoint
investigations. They contain application or
platform-centric items of use to characterize
activities handled or observed by the log creator.

Beneﬁts

•  Since they are collected and retained for business
operations purposes, logs are widely available and
processes often in place to analyze them.

•  Raw log data can be aggregated for centralized
analysis. Many organizations have this capability in
some form of SIEM or related platform.

Drawbacks

•  Log data contains varying levels of detail in numerous
formats, often requiring parsing and enrichment
to add context or additional data to corroborate
ﬁndings.

•  If log data is not already aggregated, ﬁnding it can
involve signiﬁcant time and eﬀort before analysis
can begin.

NetFlow and Related Flow-Based Collections

Flow records contain a summarization of network communications
seen at the collection point. NetFlow contains no content – just a
summary record including metadata about each network connection.
Whether used alone to determine if communications occurred or in
conjunction with other data sources, NetFlow can be extremely helpful
for timely analysis.

Beneﬁts

•  NetFlow and similar records require much less storage space due to the lack
of content. This facilitates much longer-term records retention.

•  Analysis processes are much faster with NetFlow than full-packet capture.
It can be 100-1000x faster to run a query against NetFlow than the
corresponding pcap ﬁle.

•  There are generally fewer privacy concerns with collecting and storing
NetFlow. Local legal authority should be consulted prior to use.

•  Analysis processes apply equally to all protocols – encrypted or plaintext,
custom or standards-based.

Drawbacks

• Without content, low-level analysis and ﬁndings may not be possible.

• Many collection platforms are unique and require training or licenses to access.

Distill pcap ﬁle to

Distill pcap ﬁle to

Distill pcap ﬁle to

### NetFlow

“nfpcapd” utility from nfdump suite

•  Permits quick Layer 3 – Layer 4 searching for network traﬃc in pcap ﬁle
without parsing entire ﬁle

• for572.com/nfdump

$ nfpcapd -r infile.pcap -S 1 -z -l output_directory/

-r infile.pcap
pcap ﬁle to read

-S 1
Directory hashing structure for output data (“1” = “year/month/day/”)

-z
Compress output ﬁles

-l output_directory/ Directory in which to place output ﬁles

### Zeek
### NSM
### Logs

Zeek network security monitoring platform

•  Logs include numerous views of network traﬃc in a form that allows
ﬂexible queries and parsing in numerous platforms

• for572.com/zeek-nsm

$ zeek for572 -r infile.pcap

for572
Zeek proﬁle to use, typically deﬁned in
“/opt/zeek/share/zeek/site/<%profile_name%>.zeek”

-r infile.pcap
pcap ﬁle to read

Bro
NSM
Logs

### Passive
### DNS
### Logs

PassiveDNS lightweight DNS traﬃc logger

•  Generates simpliﬁed log records detailing DNS queries and responses

• for572.com/passivedns

$ passivedns -r infile.pcap -l dnslog.txt -L nxdomain.txt

-r infile.pcap
pcap ﬁle to read

-l dnslog.txt
Output ﬁle containing log entries of DNS queries and responses

-L nxdomain.txt
Output ﬁle containing log entries of queries that generated NXDOMAIN
responses

The following entries are part of the results for a DNS query/response for the “www.reddit.com” hostname:

1456702040.919984||192.168.75.6||192.168.75.1||IN||www.reddit.com.||A||198.41.208.136||297||1
1456702040.919984||192.168.75.6||192.168.75.1||IN||www.reddit.com.||A||198.41.208.140||297||1
1456702040.919984||192.168.75.6||192.168.75.1||IN||www.reddit.com.||A||198.41.209.142||297||2
1456702040.919984||192.168.75.6||192.168.75.1||IN||www.reddit.com.||A||198.41.209.140||297||1
1456702040.919984||192.168.75.6||192.168.75.1||IN||www.reddit.com.||A||198.41.209.137||297||1

Each entry consists of the following ﬁelds:

1456702040.919984 UNIX timestamp + microseconds

192.168.75.6
Client IP address

192.168.75.1
Server IP address

IN
Class (IN = “INTERNET” class)

www.reddit.com
Name requested

A
Record type

198.41.209.137
Answer received
(>1 gives multiple rows)

297
TTL value (seconds to cache)

11
Cached responses since last entry

## SOF-ELK®

SOF-ELK is a VM appliance with a preconﬁgured, customized installation of the Elastic Stack.
It was designed speciﬁcally to address the ever-growing volume of data involved in a typical
investigation, as well as to support both threat hunting and security operations components
of information security programs. The SOF-ELK customizations include numerous log parsers, enrichments,
and related conﬁgurations that aim to make the platform a ready-to-use analysis appliance. The SOF-ELK
platform is a free and open-source appliance, available for anyone to download. The conﬁguration ﬁles are
publicly available in a GitHub repository and the appliance is designed for upgrades in the ﬁeld. The latest
downloadable appliance details are at for572.com/sof-elk-readme.

What is “ELK” and the “Elastic Stack”?
The Elastic Stack consists of the Elasticsearch search and analytics
engine, the Logstash data collection and enrichment platform, and
the Kibana visualization layer. It is commonly known as “ELK”,
named for these three components.
The broader Elastic Stack includes other components such as
the Elastic Beats family of log shippers, and various security and
performance monitoring components.
All of the ELK components and the Beats log shippers are free and
open-source software. Some other components of the Elastic Stack
are commercially-licensed.

Booting and Logging into SOF-ELK
The SOF-ELK VM is distributed in ready-to-boot mode. You may want
to add additional CPU cores and RAM if available. Do not decrease
the CPU or RAM. After the VM boots, its IP address is displayed on the
pre-authentication screen. This IP address is needed for both remote
shell access (SSH) and web access to the Kibana interface.
Log in with the “elk_user” user account and password
“forensics”. The elk_user has administrative access using
the sudo utility. The password should be changed after ﬁrst login
using local preferences or policies. The SSH server is running on the
default port, 22. Access this with your preferred SSH/SCP/SFTP client
software. The Kibana interface is running on port 5601. Access this
with your preferred web browser. (Note that Microsoft Edge is known
to be problematic.)

Updating With Git
The SOF-ELK VM uses a clone of the GitHub-based repository
containing all conﬁguration ﬁles. This allows the user to update an
operational install’s conﬁguration ﬁles without needing to download
a new copy of the VM itself. ALWAYS check the current GitHub
repository for any notes or special instructions before updating an
operational SOF-ELK platform.
To update the VM, ensure it has Internet connectivity and run the
following command:
$ sudo sof-elk_update.sh

Kibana Query Language Syntax
The Kibana user interface uses the Kibana Query Language (KQL)
syntax for searching the data contained in Elasticsearch. Below are
some of the basic syntaxes that will help you search data that has
been loaded to SOF-ELK.

Basic Searching
The most basic search syntax is “fieldname:value”, which
will match all documents with a “fieldname” ﬁeld set to a value
of “value”. Searches can be negated by preﬁxing them with
“not”. Some examples:
• hostname:webserver
• not querytype:AAAA

Logical Construction
Multiple searches can be combined using “and” and “or”.
•  destination_geo.asn:Amazon.com and
in_bytes > 1000000

Numerical Ranges
Fields containing numerical values can be searched with standard
range operators.
• total_bytes > 1000000
• return_code >= 200 and return_code <300

Partial String Searches
The “*” is used as a wildcard character.
• username:*admin*
• query:*.cz.cc

IP Addresses and CIDR Blocks
IP address ﬁelds can be searched for speciﬁc values or can use CIDR
notation for netblocks.
• source_ip:172.16.7.11
• destination_ip:172.16.6.0/24

Clearing and Re-Parsing Data
Removing data from SOF-ELK’s Elasticsearch indices as well as
forcing the platform to re-parse source data on the ﬁlesystem itself
have both been automated with a shell script. Removal is done by
index, and optionally allows a single source ﬁle to be removed. The
index name is required.

Get a list of currently-loaded indices:
$ sof-elk_clear.py -i list

Remove all data from the netflow index:
$ sof-elk_clear.py -i netflow

Remove all data from the syslog index and reload all source data:
$ sudo sof-elk_clear.py -i syslog -r

Remove all data from the index that was originally loaded from the
/logstash/httpdlog/access_log ﬁle:

$  sof-elk_clear.py
-f /logstash/httpdlog/access_log

Network Forensics is a critical component
for most modern digital forensic,
incident response, and threat hunting
work. Whether pursued alone or as
a supplement or driver to traditional
endpoint investigations, network data can
provide decisive insight into the human
or automated communications within a
compromised environment.

Network Forensic Analysis techniques
can be used in a traditional forensic
capacity as well as for continuous incident
response/threat hunting operations.

Additional Resources

SANS FOR572: Advanced Network
Forensics and Analysis:
for572.com/course

FOR572 Course Notebook:
for572.com/notebook

Network Forensics and Analysis Poster:
for572.com/poster

GIAC Certiﬁed Network Forensic
Analyst certiﬁcation available:
for572.com/gnfa

### Continuous Incident Response and Threat
### Hunting: Proactive Threat Identiﬁcation

CORE CONCEPT:
Apply new intelligence to existing data to discover unknown incidents

NETWORK FORENSICS USE CASE:
Threat intelligence often contains network-based indicators such as IP addresses,
domain names, signatures, URLs, and more.  When these are known, existing data
stores can be reviewed to determine if there were indications of the intel-informed
activity that warrant further investigation.

### Post-Incident Forensic Analysis:
### Reactive Detection and Response

CORE CONCEPT:
Examine existing data to more fully understand a known incident

NETWORK FORENSICS USE CASE:
Nearly every phase of an attack can include network activity.  Understanding an
attacker’s actions during Reconnaissance, Delivery, Exploitation, Installation,
Command and Control, and Post-Exploitation phases can provide deep and valuable
insight into their actions, intent, and capability.

This poster was created by SANS Instructor Phil Hagen with support from SANS DFIR Faculty   ©2021 Phil Hagen.  All Rights Reserved.  ©2021 Lewes Technology Consulting, LLC

DFPS-FOR572_v1.9_03-21

Loading Data to SOF-ELK
SOF-ELK can ingest several data formats, including:

More sources are being tested and added to the platform and can be
activated through the GitHub repository. See the “Updating With Git”
section for more details on how to do this.
All source data can be loaded from existing ﬁles (DFIR Model) as well
as from live sources (Security Operations Model).

DFIR Model
Place source data onto the SOF-ELK VM under the /logstash/
directory tree.
Syslog data: /logstash/syslog/
Since syslog entries often do not include the year, subdirectories for
each year can be created in this location – for example,
/logstash/syslog/2018/

HTTP server logs: /logstash/httpd/
Supports common, combined, and related formats

PassiveDNS logs: /logstash/passivedns/
Raw logs from the passivedns utility

NetFlow from nfcapd-collected data stores:
/logstash/nfarch/
Use the included nfdump2sof-elk.sh or
vpcflow2sof-elk.sh scripts to create SOF-ELK-compatible
NetFlow ASCII ﬁles.

Zeek NSM logs: /logstash/zeek/
Supports multiple diﬀerent log types, based on default Zeek NSM
ﬁlenames

EZ Tools JSON Files: /logstash/kape/
Supports multiple ﬁles from the KAPE family of Eric Zimmerman’s
tools in JSON format. Open the necessary ﬁrewall port(s) to allow your
preferred network-based ingest to occur.

Security Operations Model

Syslog: TCP and UDP syslog protocol
$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 5514 -r tcp

$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 5514 -r udp

Syslog: Elastic Filebeat shipper
$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 5044 -r tcp

NetFlow: NetFlow v5 and v9 protocols
$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 9995 -r udp

HTTP Server logs: TCP and UDP syslog protocol
$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 5515 -r tcp

$  sudo fw_modify.sh -a open -p 5515 -r udp

Conﬁgure the log shipper or source to send data to the port
indicated above.

•  Syslog (many diﬀerent log
types supported)
• HTTP server access logs

• NetFlow
• Selected Zeek logs
• Selected EZ Tools JSON ﬁles

SOF-ELK Dashboards
Several Kibana dashboards are provided, each designed to address
basic analysis requirements. Open the Kibana interface in a web
browser using the SOF-ELK VM’s IP address on port 5601.
The following dashboards are included:
• SOF-ELK VM Introduction Dashboard
• HTTPD Log Dashboard
• Syslog Dashboard
• NetFlow Dashboard
Additional dashboards will be distributed through the GitHub
repository. (See the “Updating With Git” section.)
The Kibana dashboards allow the analyst to interact with and explore
the data contained in the underlying Elasticsearch engine. Several
features provide a level of interactivity that allows dynamic analysis
across vast volumes of data.

Querying Available Data
The top of each dashboard
allows the user to input
KQL queries, detailed
in the “Kibana Query
Language Syntax” section. Elasticsearch determines how well its
documents match, including a “_score” ﬁeld that indicates how
well each document matches the query.

Filtering
Filters can also be applied in the Kibana interface. These are similar
to queries, but are a binary match/non-match search without a
“_score” ﬁeld. Elasticsearch caches frequently-used ﬁlters to
optimize their performance.
Kibana shows ﬁlters as boxes below the query ﬁeld.
“Must have” and “must not have” are diﬀerentiated
with the red “NOT” text.

Filters can be modiﬁed
with the drop-down menu
displayed after clicking on
a ﬁlter.

Document Expansion
When a dashboard includes
a document listing panel,
each document can be
expanded by clicking the
triangle icon on
the left.
This will show
all ﬁelds for the
document.

Interactive Filter Generation
Each ﬁeld displayed in the record details can be interactively built
into a ﬁlter with the magnifying glass icons displayed when hovering
over the ﬁeld. The plus sign magnifying glass creates a “must have”
ﬁlter, the minus sign magnifying glass creates a “must not have”
ﬁlter. The table icon adds the ﬁeld to the document listing panel and
the ﬁnal icon creates a “ﬁeld
must be present” ﬁlter.

## Network Forensics
## and Analysis Poster

---
*Page 2*


## Network Trafﬁc Anomalies

Knowing what is “normal” in any environment is critical in
order to quickly determine outlier events that may suggest
suspicious or malicious activity. In the world of network
protocols, this can be a signiﬁcant challenge. There are
countless ways network trafﬁc can be manipulated to the
attacker’s advantage while still appearing to be normal.
In many cases, these deviations still follow all the rules
of the carrier protocol. The conditions presented here
can be useful in identifying anomalies, but this is not
an exhaustive list. They may be useful in establishing or
boosting a baselining program or for providing a healthy
dose of skepticism during an investigation.

## Network Forensic Toolbox

### Tools are a critical part of any forensic process, but they alone cannot

### solve problems or generate ﬁndings. The analyst must understand the

### available tools and their strengths and weaknesses, then assess the best

### approach between raw source data and the investigative goals at hand.

### The tools detailed here are far from a comprehensive list, but represent a

core set of utilities often used in network forensic analysis. More extensive

documentation is available in the tools’ man pages and online documentation.

tcpdump: Log or parse network trafﬁc

Classically used to dump live network traﬃc to pcap ﬁles,
tcpdump is more commonly used in network forensics to
perform data reduction by reading from an existing pcap ﬁle, applying a ﬁlter,
then writing the reduced data to a new pcap ﬁle. tcpdump uses the BPF
(Berkeley Packet Filter) language for packet selection.

Usage:
$ tcpdump <options> <bpf filter>

Common command-line parameters:
-n
Prevent DNS lookups on IP addresses. Use twice to also prevent port-
to-service lookups
-r
Read from speciﬁed pcap ﬁle instead of the network
-w
Write packet data to a ﬁle
-i
Specify the network interface on which to capture
-s
Number of bytes per packet to capture
-C
Number of megabytes to save in a capture ﬁle before starting a new
ﬁle
-G
Number of seconds to save in each capture ﬁle (requires time format
in output ﬁlename)
-W
Used with the -C or -G options, limit the number of rotated ﬁles
Note: The BPF ﬁlter is an optional parameter

Common BPF primitives:
host IP address or FQDN
tcp
Layer 4 protocol is TCP
net
Netblock in CIDR notation
udp
Layer 4 protocol is UDP
port TCP or UDP port number
icmp Layer 4 protocol is ICMP
ip
Layer 3 protocol is IP
Parameters such as host, net, and port can be applied in just one direction
with the src or dst modiﬁers. Primitives can be combined with and, or,
or not, and order can be enforced with parentheses.

BPF Examples:
• tcp and port 80
• udp and dst host 8.8.8.8
•  src host 1.2.3.4 and (dst net 10.0.0.0/8 or
dst net 172.16.0.0/12)
Capturing live traﬃc generally requires elevated operating system
permissions (e.g. sudo), but reading from existing pcap ﬁles only requires
ﬁlesystem-level read permissions to the source ﬁle itself.

Examples:

$  tcpdump -n -r infile.pcap
-w tcp80.pcap 'tcp port 80'

$  sudo tcpdump -n -i enp0s3 -w outfile.pcap

$  sudo tcpdump -n -i enp0s3 -C 1024
-G 100 -w 10GB_rolling_buffer.pcap

$  sudo tcpdump -n -i enp0s8 -G 86400
-w dns-%F.%T.pcap

Wireshark: Deep, protocol-aware
packet exploration and analysis

Wireshark is perhaps the most widely known packet data exploration tool. It
provides extensive protocol coverage and low-level data exploration features.
Its included protocol parsers number over 2,000 and extract over 180,000
diﬀerent data ﬁelds. Wireshark parsers often normalize the content in these
ﬁelds for readability. (DNS hostnames, for example, are presented in FQDN
form rather than literal strings as they appear in the packet.)

Wireshark display ﬁlters:
Wireshark provides rich and extensive display ﬁltering functionality based on
the ﬁelds identiﬁed by protocol decoders. Any of the 180,000+ ﬁelds can be
evaluated in a display ﬁlter statement.

Basic ﬁlters use the following syntax:
• fieldname == value
• fieldname < value
• fieldname >= value
Note: Avoid using the != operator, as it can produce unintended results with
ﬁelds that occur more than once in a single packet.
Complex display ﬁlters can be built with the && and || logical conjunctions,
and parentheses to enforce order of operations.

Display ﬁlter resources:
See the wireshark-filter man page for more command-line details
on how to construct display ﬁlters.

tcpxtract: Carve reassembled TCP
streams for known header and footer
bytes to attempt ﬁle reassembly

This is the TCP equivalent to the venerable foremost and scalpel
disk/memory carving utilities. tcpxtract will reassemble each TCP
stream, then search for known start/end bytes in the stream, writing out
matching sub-streams to disk. It is not protocol-aware, so it cannot determine
metadata such as ﬁlenames and cannot handle protocol content consisting of
non-contiguous byte sequences. Notably, tcpxtract cannot parse SMB
traﬃc, encrypted payload content, or chunked-encoded HTTP traﬃc. Parsing
compressed data requires signatures for the compressed bytes rather than
the corresponding plaintext.

Usage:
$ tcpxtract -r <input file> <options>

Common command-line parameters:
-f
Read from speciﬁed pcap ﬁle
-c
Conﬁguration (signature) ﬁle to use
-o
Place output ﬁles into speciﬁed directory

Signature format:
• file_ext(max_size, start_bytes, end_bytes);

Signature examples:
• gif(3000000, \x47\x49\x46\x38\x37\x61,
\x00\x3b);
• rpm(400000000, \xed\xab\xee\xdb);

Example:
•  tcpxtract -f infile.pcap
-c rpm-tcpxtract.conf  -o ./

zeek-cut: Extract speciﬁc ﬁelds from Zeek logs

The Zeek NSM creates log ﬁles as needed to document observed
network traﬃc.  If the tab-separated value (TSV) format is used, the
“zeek-cut” utility can extract just the ﬁelds of interest.

Usage:
$  cat <log file> | zeek-cut <options> <fields>

Common command-line parameters:
-u
Convert timestamp to human-readable, UTC format
-c
Display header blocks at start of output

Identifying ﬁelds of interest:
Each diﬀerent log ﬁle type contains various ﬁelds, detailed in the header of the ﬁle.
Inspect the ﬁrst few lines and identify the one that begins with the string #fields.
The remainder of this line contains the Zeek-speciﬁc names for each column of
data, which can be extracted with the zeek-cut utility. Consult the Zeek NSM
documentation for details on each column’s meaning.

Examples:
$  cat files.log | zeek-cut -u ts
fuid tx_hosts sha256
$  zcat http*.gz | zeek-cut -u ts id.orig_h

host uri user_agent info_code

NetworkMiner: Protocol-aware object
extraction tool that writes ﬁles to disk

Object extraction is often a tedious task, but NetworkMiner
reliably performs this function for a number of common protocols. File objects
are written to disk as they are encountered, while ﬁelds (credentials, hosts,
etc.) can be exported to CSV format.
Writing ﬁles to disk often triggers host-based defenses, so running this utility
in an isolated and controlled environment is the most common use model.
NetworkMiner is a commercial utility that also provides a free version.
The free version is licensed for operational use, not just testing.

ngrep: Display metadata and context
from packets that match a speciﬁed
regular expression pattern

While grep is a very capable tool for ASCII input, it does not understand the
pcap ﬁle format. ngrep performs the same function but against the Layer
4 – Layer 7 payload in each individual packet. It does not perform any TCP
session reassembly, so matches are made against individual packets only.

Usage:
$  ngrep -I <input file> <options>
<pattern> <bpf filter>

Common command-line parameters:

-I
Read from speciﬁed pcap ﬁle

-O
Write matching packets to speciﬁed pcap ﬁle

-i
Case-insensitive search

-v
Invert match – only show packets that do not match the search
pattern

-t
Show timestamp from each matching packet

Note: The BPF ﬁlter is an optional parameter

Examples:

$  ngrep -I infile.pcap 'RETR' 'tcp and port 21'

$  ngrep -I infile.pcap -i 'l33tAUTH'

editcap: Modify contents of a capture ﬁle

Since the BPF is limited to evaluating packet content data, a diﬀerent
utility is required to ﬁlter on pcap metadata. This command will read
capture ﬁles, limit the time frame, ﬁle size, and other parameters, then write
the resulting data to a new capture ﬁle, optionally de-duplicating packet data.

Usage:
$  editcap <options> <input file>
<output file>

Common command-line parameters:
-A
Select packets at or after the speciﬁed time
(Use format: YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS)
-B
Select packets before the speciﬁed time
-d
De-duplicate packets
(Can also use -D or -w for more ﬁne-grained control)
-c
Maximum number of packets per output ﬁle
-i
Maximum number of seconds per output ﬁle (Note that the -c and
-i ﬂags cause multiple ﬁles to be created, each named with an
incrementing integer and initial timestamp for each ﬁle’s content,
e.g. output_00000_20170417174516.pcap)

Examples:

$  editcap -A '2017-01-16 00:00:00'
-B '2017-02-16 00:00:00'
infile.pcap 2017-jan-16.pcap

$  editcap -d infile.pcap dedupe.pcap

$  editcap -i 3600 infile.pcap hourly.pcap

capinfos: Calculate and display high-level
summary statistics for an input pcap ﬁle

This utility displays summary metadata from one or more source pcap ﬁles.
Reported metadata includes but is not limited to start/end times, hash values,
packet count, and byte count.

Usage:
$  capinfos <options> <input file 1>
<input file 2> <...>

Common command-line parameters:
-A
Generate all available statistics
-T
Use “table” output format instead of list format

Examples:
$  capinfos -A infile.pcap
$  capinfos -A -T infile2.pcap
$  capinfos -A *.pcap

grep: Display lines from input text that
match a speciﬁed regular expression pattern

Searches input text from a ﬁle or via STDIN pipes using extremely
ﬂexible and age-old regular expressions. Matching lines are displayed, but
output can be ﬁne-grained to address speciﬁc analytic requirements.

Usage:
$  grep <options> <pattern> <input file>

Common command-line parameters:
-i
Case-insensitive search
-r
Recursively process all ﬁles within a directory tree
-a
Fully search all ﬁles as ASCII, even if they appear to contain binary data
-l
Only display ﬁle names that contain matches instead of the lines on which
the match is found
-F
Disable the regular expression engine, providing a signiﬁcant speed beneﬁt
-c
Display count of matching lines
-A
Display a number of lines before each line that matches the search pattern
-B
Display a number of lines after each line that matches the search pattern
-C
Display a number of context lines before and after each line that matches
the search pattern
-H
Display ﬁlenames in addition to matching line contents – this is the default
with -r
-h
Omit ﬁlenames from output as displayed with -r
-v
Invert match – only show results that do not match the search pattern – with
-l, show ﬁles’ names in which there is at least one line not matching the
search pattern – with -c, show count of non-matching lines
Regular expressions are a dark art of shell commands.

Examples:
$  grep pastebin access.log
$  grep -rail google /var/spool/squid/
$  grep -Fv 192.168.75. syslog-messages
$  grep -C 5 utmscr error.log

mergecap: Merge two or more pcap ﬁles

When faced with a large number of pcap ﬁles, it may be advantageous
to merge a subset of them to a single ﬁle for more streamlined processing.
This utility will ensure the packets written to the output ﬁle are chronological.

Usage:
$  mergecap <options> -w <output file>
<input file 1> <input file 2>
<input file n>

Common command-line parameters:
-w
New pcap ﬁle to create, containing merged data
-s
Number of bytes per packet to retain

Example:
$  mergecap -w new.pcap infile1.pcap
infile2.pcap

nfdump: Process NetFlow data from
nfcapd-compatible ﬁles on disk

Files created by nfcapd (live collector) or nfpcapd
(pcap-to-NetFlow distillation) are read, parsed, and displayed by nfdump.
Filters include numerous observed and calculated ﬁelds, and outputs can be
customized to unique analysis requirements.

Usage:
$  nfdump (-R <input directory path> |
-r <nfcapd file> )
<options> <filter>

Common command-line parameters:
-r
Read from the speciﬁed single ﬁle
-R
Recursively read from the speciﬁed directory tree
-t
Specify time window in which to search (Use format:
YYYY/MM/DD.hh:mm:ss-YYYY/MM/DD.hh:mm:ss)
-o
Output format to use (line, long, extended, or custom with
fmt:<format string>)
-O
Output sort ordering (tstart, bytes, packets, more)
-a
Aggregate output on source IP+port, destination IP+port, layer 4
protocol
-A
Comma-separated custom aggregation ﬁelds

Filter syntax:
host IP address or FQDN
net
Netblock in CIDR notation
proto Layer 4 protocol (tcp, udp, icmp, etc)
as
Autonomous System number
Parameters such as host, net, and port can be applied in just one
direction with the src or dst modiﬁers. Primitives can be combined with
and, or, or not, and order can be enforced with parentheses.

Filter examples:
• proto tcp and port 80
• proto udp and dst host 8.8.8.8
•  src host 1.2.3.4 and (dst net 10.0.0.0/8 or
dst net 172.16.0.0/12)
• src as 32625 (Note: Not all collections include ASNs)

Custom output formatting:
Format strings for the custom output format option
(-o 'fmt:<format string>') consist of format tags, including
but not limited to those below.
%ts
Start time
%sa
Source IP address
%te
End time
%da
Destination IP address
%td
Duration (In seconds)
%sp
Source port (TCP or UDP)
%pr
Layer 4 protocol
%dp
Destination port (TCP or UDP; formatted as type.code for ICMP)
%sap Source IP address and port
%dap Destination IP address and port
%pkt Packet count
%byt Byte count
%flg
TCP ﬂags (sum total for ﬂow)
%bps Bits per second (average)
%pps Packets per second (average)
%bpp Bytes per packet (average)

Custom aggregation:
Records displayed can be aggregated (tallied) on user-speciﬁed ﬁelds
including but not limited to those below:
proto
Layer 4 protocol
srcip
Source IP address
dstip
Destination IP address
srcport TCP or UDP source port
dstport TCP or UDP destination port
srcnet
Source netblock in CIDR notation
dstnet
Destination netblock in CIDR notation

Examples:
$  nfdump -r nfcapd.201703271745
-o long 'proto tcp and port 53'
$  nfdump -R /var/log/netflow/2017/03/
-o 'fmt:%sa %da %pr' -A srcip,dstip,proto
'dst net 66.35.59.0/24'
$  nfdump -R /var/log/netflow/2016/
-O tstart 'proto tcp and port 4444'

tshark: Command-line access to nearly
all Wireshark features

For all of Wireshark’s features, the ability to access them from the
command line provides scalable power to the analyst. Whether building
repeatable commands into a script, looping over dozens of input ﬁles, or
performing analysis directly within the shell, tshark packs nearly all of
Wireshark’s features in a command-line utility.

Usage:
$  tshark -n -r <input file> <options>
-Y '<display filter>'

Common command-line parameters:
-n
Prevent DNS lookups on IP addresses
-r
Read from speciﬁed pcap ﬁle
-w
Write packet data to a ﬁle
-Y
Specify Wireshark-compatible display ﬁlter
-T
Specify output mode (fields, text (default), pdml, etc.)
-e
When used with -T fields, speciﬁes a ﬁeld to include in output
tab-separated values (can be used multiple times)
-G
Specify glossary to display (protocols, fields, etc.) – shows
available capabilities via command line, suitable for grep’ing, etc.

Display ﬁlter resources:
See the wireshark-filter man page for more command-line details
on how to construct display ﬁlters.

Examples:
$  tshark -n -r infile.pcap
-Y 'http.host contains "google"'
-T fields -e ip.src -e http.host
-e http.user_agent
$  tshark -n -r infile.pcap
-Y 'ssl.handshake.certificates'
-w just_certificates.pcap

Arkime is a full-packet ingestion and indexing platform. It reads a live network data stream or
existing pcap ﬁles, then extracts data from known protocol ﬁelds to store in an Elasticsearch
backend. Arkime calls these ﬁelds Session Protocol Information, or SPI data. SPI data is a session-centric
view, associating the client- and server-sourced directions of a connection for easy analysis. Arkime
separates full-packet data and SPI data, allowing different storage allocation and retention policies. The user can export a subset of
trafﬁc in pcap format, making it a valuable addition to the workﬂow, since any pcap-aware tool can be used on the derived data.

Loading Data to Arkime

Arkime can load network traﬃc from existing pcap ﬁles (DFIR Model) or
a live network interface (Security Operations Model).

DFIR Model

Load pcap ﬁles with the “moloch-capture” command.

To load a single ﬁle:
$ moloch-capture -q --copy -r <input file>

To load pcap ﬁles recursively (ﬁles must have a “.pcap” extension):
$  moloch-capture -q --copy --recursive

-R <input directory>

Optionally add tags to sessions with the “-t” ﬂag
$  moloch-capture -q --copy -r <input file>
-t <tag1> -t <tag2>

Security Operations Model

Consult the Arkime documentation for more comprehensive
instructions on this model. Arkime must have access to an interface
connected to a tap or port mirror and the “config.ini” ﬁle must
be changed before starting the capture process as a service.

Clearing Data

To remove SPI data from Arkime’s Elasticsearch index, ﬁrst
stop any running capture and viewer processes. Then, run the
following command:

$  /data/moloch/db/db.pl
<elasticsearch url> wipe

(Your path may vary – /data/moloch/db/ is the
typical default path for this script.)

On the FOR572-distributed Arkime VM, the
“arkime_clear.sh” script automates the entire
process, including stopping and restarting the Arkime services.

To re-parse any input data, re-load the pcap ﬁles as described
in the “Loading Data to Arkime” section.

Examples:

$  /data/moloch/db/db.pl
http://127.0.0.1:9200 wipe

$  sudo arkime_clear.sh

Query Syntax

Arkime uses a unique query syntax, but oﬀers UI features that keep it
easy to learn and use.

The search interface uses
a “drop-down suggestion”
feature to show the
analyst all matching ﬁeld
names.

For more comprehensive
online documentation,
including a list of all ﬁelds,
search syntax, and the
Arkime UI itself, click the
owl icon in the top left.

Basic searching uses the following syntax:

• fieldname == value
• fieldname != value
• fieldname > value
• fieldname <= value

Strings can use ”*” as a wildcard. IP address ﬁelds can use full IPs or
netblocks in CIDR notation. Logical conjunction is performed with “&&” for
“and”, “||” for “or”, and “()” for grouping.

Searching for sessions in which any speciﬁc ﬁeld exists at all requires the
following syntax:

fieldname == EXISTS!

Examples:

• host.dns == *google*
• http.method == POST && host.http == *homedepot.com
• tls.cipher == EXISTS! && tls.cipher != *DHE*

Arkime UI

The Arkime web-based interface includes several tabs, each
presenting a diﬀerent view of the underlying source data.

Sessions: This is the most frequently-used tab, where session
data is displayed and queried. Each session can be unrolled
to expose all SPI data extracted from the original content.

SPI View: Explore all of SPI ﬁelds within a data set.

SPI Graph: Any SPI ﬁeld can be charted and compared to
other ﬁelds over time.

calamaris: Generate summary reports
from web proxy server log ﬁles

The calamaris utility performs high-level summary analysis of
many diﬀerent formats of web proxy log ﬁles. These reports are broken down
by HTTP request methods, second-level domains, client IP addresses, HTTP
response codes, and more.

Usage:
cat <input file> | calamaris <options>

Common command-line parameter:
-a
Generate all available reports
Examples:

$  cat access.log | calamaris -a

$  zgrep 1.2.3.4 access.log.gz | calamaris -a

$  grep badhost.cc.cz | calamaris -a

HTTP GET vs POST Ratio

How:
HTTP proxy logs, NSM logs, HTTP server logs

What:
The proportion of observed HTTP requests that use the GET, POST, or other methods.

Why:
This ratio establishes a typical activity proﬁle for HTTP traﬃc. When it skews too far from the
normal baseline, it may suggest brute force logins, SQL injection attempts, RAT usage, server
feature probing, or other suspicious/malicious activity.

Top-Talking IP Addresses

How:
NetFlow

What:
The list of hosts responsible for the highest volume of network communications in volume
and/or connection count. Calculate this on a rolling daily/weekly/monthly/annual basis to
account for periodic shifts in traﬃc patterns.

Why:
Unusually large spikes in traﬃc may suggest exﬁltration activity, while spikes in connection
attempts may suggest C2 activity.

HTTP User-Agent

How:
HTTP proxy logs, NSM logs, HTTP server logs

What:
The HTTP User-Agent generally identiﬁes the software responsible for issuing an HTTP
request. This can be useful to proﬁle software operating within the environment.

Why:
This is an invaluable identiﬁer to proﬁle activity within the environment. It can proﬁle which
web browser titles, versions, and extensions are in use. More recently, desktop and mobile
applications use unique User-Agent strings as well. Knowing the “normal” strings present
causes outliers to stand out, which may highlight suspicious activity. However, this is an
arbitrary and optional header, so be skeptical of behavior that suggests forgery – such as
rapid change for a given IP address, signiﬁcant increase in the number of observed User-
Agent strings, etc.

Top DNS Domains Queried

How:
Passive DNS logs, DNS server-side query logs, NSM logs

What:
The most frequently queried second-level domains (e.g. “example.com” or
“example.co.uk”) based on internal clients’ request activity. The top 1000 domains
on a rolling daily basis may be a good starting point, but this number should be adjusted
to local requirements.

Why:
In general, the behaviors of a given environment don’t drastically change on a day-to-
day basis. Therefore, the top 500-700 domains queried on any given day should not
diﬀer too much from the top 1000 from the previous day. (The diﬀerence in count allows
for natural ebb and ﬂow of daily behavior.) Any domain that rockets to the top of the
list may suggest an event that requires attention, such as a new phishing campaign, C2
domain, or other anomaly.

HTTP Return Code Ratio

How:
HTTP Proxy logs, NSM logs, HTTP server logs

What:
The return code is a three-digit integer that helps to indicate “what happened” on the server
answering a request. These are grouped into “families” by hundreds: 100s = informational,
200s = success, 300s = redirection, 400s = client-side error, 500s = server-side error.

Why:
Knowing what happened at the server end of the transaction can be extremely useful in
characterizing HTTP activity. A spike in 400-series codes could indicate reconnaissance or
scanning activity, while an unusually high number of 500-series codes could indicate failed login
or SQL injection attempts. As with other observations, knowing the typically-observed ratios of
these values can help to identify anomalous trends that require further investigation.

Newly-Observed/Newly-Registered Domains

How:
Passive DNS logs, DNS server-side query logs, NSM logs

What:
Any domain that has never previously been queried from within the environment, according
to the historical domain query logs, or the age of a domain, according to its WHOIS “Date
Registered.”

Why:
The ﬁrst time a domain is queried in a given environment may indicate a new or highly-
focused targeting operation. Brand new domains are often associated with malicious activity,
given that attackers generally require a dynamic infrastructure for their operations.

External Infrastructure Usage Attempts

How:
NetFlow, Firewall logs, NSM logs

What:
Although best practice is to restrict outbound communications by default and approve
necessary services and connections by exception, this is often not the case – perimeters
are still notoriously porous in the outbound direction. Even in a properly-constrained
environment, these attempts should create artifacts of the failed connection attempts.

Why:
By identifying internal clients that attempt to or succeed in using external services, it is
possible to quickly collect a list of endpoints that exhibit anomalous behavior. These may
include connections to external DNS servers rather than internal resolvers, HTTP connection
attempts that seek to bypass proxy servers, connections to VPN providers, raw socket
connections to unusual ports, and more.

Typical Port and Protocol Usage

How:
NetFlow

What:
The list of ports and corresponding protocols that account for the most communication in
terms of volume and/or connection count. Calculate this on a daily/weekly/monthly/annual
basis to account for periodic shifts in traﬃc patterns.

Why:
Similar to the purpose for tracking top-talking IP addresses, knowing the typical port and
protocol usage enables quick identiﬁcation of anomalies that should be further explored for
potential suspicious activity.

DNS TTL Values and RR Counts

How:
Passive DNS logs, NSM logs

What:
TTL refers to the number of seconds that a caching DNS server should retain a given record.
The number of Resource Records in a given DNS packet is noted in the RR count ﬁeld.

Why:
Very short TTLs may suggest fast-ﬂux DNS or potential tunneling behavior. A high RR
count could indicate large-scale load balancing associated with fast-ﬂux or similar elastic
architectures. While these behaviors can suggest suspicious behavior, they are also commonly
seen with benign network activity such as content delivery networks, round robin DNS-based
load balancing, and similar architectures.

Autonomous System Communications

How:
NetFlow, NSM logs

What:
Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) are numerical ‘handles’ assigned to netblock
owners such as ISPs, datacenters, and other service providers. These can suggest
Internet “neighborhoods” to characterize network traﬃc based on more than IP address
or CIDR blocks.

Why:
Certain ASNs are often more prominently associated with malicious activity than others.
Reputation databases can be useful in determining these. Even without an intelligence
overlay, identifying the ASNs with which systems in the environment communicate is a useful
baseline metric that can easily identify communications with unusual ASNs that require
further attention.

Periodic Trafﬁc Volume Metrics

How:
NetFlow

What:
Maintaining traﬃc metrics on time-of-day, day-of-week, day-of-month, and similar bases.

Why:
These will identify normative traﬃc patterns, making deviations easier to spot and
investigate. A sudden spike of traﬃc or connections during an overnight or weekend period
(when there is typically little or no traﬃc) would be a clear anomaly of concern.

tcpflow: Reassemble input packet data
to TCP data segments

This utility will perform TCP reassembly, then output each side of the
TCP data ﬂows to separate ﬁles.  This is essentially a scalable, command-
line equivalent to Wireshark’s “Follow | TCP Stream” feature.  Additionally,
tcpflow can perform a variety of decoding and post-processing functions
on the resulting ﬂows.

Usage:
$  tcpflow <options> -r <input file>
-o <output path>

Common command-line parameters:
-r
Read from speciﬁed pcap ﬁle (can be used multiple times for multiple ﬁles)
-l
Read from multiple pcap ﬁles (with wildcards)
-o
Place output ﬁles into speciﬁed directory

Examples:

$  tcpflow -r infile.pcap  -o /tmp/output/

$  tcpflow -l *.pcap -o /tmp/output/

jq: Parse and format JSON data

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a standardized format for key-value
pairs and related data structures and is used increasingly for log ﬁle
content. The “jq” utility provides countless ways to parse and format JSON data.

Usage:
$ cat <input file> | jq '<expression>'

Common command-line parameters:

-c
Display output in compact format

-r
Output raw (unquoted) strings

Notes: Using “'.'” as the expression will pretty-print the entire input set.

UNIX epoch timestamps can be converted to ISO8601 format with the
“| fromdate” modiﬁer

The “select” function can be much slower than using “grep” ﬁrst and then
applying “jq” transforms

Examples:

$ cat file.json | jq '.'

$  cat file.json |
jq '{ ts: .ts | todate, uid }'

$  cat file.json |
jq 'select( .host == "for572.com" ) | .url'

$ zgrep for572.com file.json.gz | jq '.url'

### OPERATING
### SYSTEM &
### DEVICE
### IN-DEPTH

### INCIDENT
### RESPONSE
### & THREAT
### HUNTING

FOR500
Windows Forensics

GCFE

FOR518
Mac and iOS
Forensic Analysis
and Incident
Response

FOR308
Digital Forensics
Essentials

FOR585
Smartphone Forensic
Analysis In-Depth

GASF

FOR508
Advanced Incident
Response, Threat Hunting,
and Digital Forensics
GCFA

FOR572
Advanced Network
Forensics: Threat
Hunting, Analysis, and
Incident Response
GNFA

FOR578
Cyber Threat Intelligence
GCTI

FOR610
REM: Malware Analysis
GREM

SEC504
Hacker Tools,
Techniques, Exploits,
and Incident Handling
GCIH

FOR498
Battleﬁeld Forensics
& Data Acquisition

GBFA

sansforensics
@sansforensics

Connections: A graph view comparing any two SPI ﬁelds. Extremely useful for
identifying relationships between data points at scale.

Hunt: Create and manage full-packet search jobs and their results.

Files: Information regarding the pcap ﬁles that Arkime has loaded and parsed.

Stats: Metrics for each Arkime capture node and Elasticsearch cluster member.

History: Review the history of actions taken in the user interface.

Settings: Manage settings for the current user.

Users: List, create, delete, and manage Arkime user accounts.

## Arkime

dﬁr.to/DFIRCast