# 41. ICS Site Visit Plan


---
*Page 1*


This tri-fold cheat sheet will help maximize efforts
to identify critical assets during on-site Industrial
Control System (ICS) visits, promote ICS security
awareness, and facilitate a smooth ICS cyber
incident response process.
Use this guide to plan ICS site visits, prepare for
cybersecurity and safety discussions, ethical hacks
of the physical security perimeter, and to establish
an ICS asset inventory that can be put it into
action for proactive defense.

7. Storing Asset Inventory Back at the Office

How to Use This Sheet

Consider these seven points to ensure that industrial
control system security supports the safety and
reliability of operations as you plan to visit site(s).
1. OSINT for ICS Defenders
2. Coordinate with Safety & Security
3. Ethically Hacking the Physical Perimeter
4. Plant Floor Cybersecurity Discussions
5. Spreadsheet App, Laptop Stand, Network Diagrams
6. Follow Up with Traffic Analysis
7. Storing Asset Inventory Back at the Office

Start by reviewing network diagrams. Use an
encrypted laptop with at least a basic spreadsheet
application to start storing your ICS asset information.
At a minimum, capture these attributes for commonly
targeted assets such as Data Historians, HMI, PLCs,
Engineering Workstations, core network devices and
Safety Instrumented Systems (SIS):
!
Site Name, location, facility type

!
Asset type and ID tag

!
Asset location: room, cabinet, rack

!
Description of asset function

!
Impact to operations if unavailable

!
IP and MAC address

!
Operating ICS protocols

!
Model/manufacturer, serial number

!
Firmware version

!
Applications installed and versions

5. Spreadsheet, Laptop Stand, Network Diagrams

Maintenance windows and safety risks can prevent
physical inspection of some assets. Augment the
physical inspection inventory with passive network
traffic capture (will require coordination and approval
from operations staff and a configured SPAN with a
network security monitoring platform such as Security
Onion). Common capture times range from 2-24
hours. Identify critical assets through packet analysis
and by observing ICS protocol traffic patterns. Use
features in free tools like Wireshark to help:
Wireshark > Statistics > Endpoints
Wireshark > Statistics > Protocol Hierarchy
Wireshark > Statistics > Conversations

6. Follow Up with Traffic Analysis

The inventory is incredibly valuable. When back at the
office store inventory updates in a database that is:

Scalable - Scalable databases can help
ensure that site inventories can be updated
or expanded, and back them up regularly.
Searchable - All fields should be indexed to
enable quick searches across inventories
gathered when used in conjunction with
threat intelligence or vulnerability
information.
Secure - Standard data protection and
security practices, including authentication
and network segmentation, should be used to
protect this sensitive data.

Asset Inventory for ICS Defense

Use threat intel to drive searches across an established
inventory database for vulnerabilities and targeted
assets for proactive defense changes. Targeted assets:
Data Historian – This is a database that
stores operational process records. Can be
abused to pivot from a compromised asset in
IT to one in the ICS network(s).
Engineering Workstation - The EW has access
to software to program and change PLCs and
other field device settings/configurations.
Human Machine Interface - The HMI is a
visual interface between the physical
process and operators that is used to review
and control the process.
Programmable Logic Controllers – PLCs
connect the physical hardware in the real
world and run logic code to read the state
or change the state of the engineered
process.

### ICS Site Visit Plan v0.1

SANS ICS
ics.sans.org

By Dean Parsons
dparsons@sans.org

---
*Page 2*


While often overlooked, an open-source intelligence
(OSINT) exercise provides a starting point to
understand an organization’s information attack space,
does not introduce disruption or risk to industrial
operations and is not detectable by ICS defenders.
An OSINT exercise can reveal an organization’s
Internet-connected devices, remote access services,
open ports, and protocols in use. This information can
be pieced together to help adversaries build an attack
against a target ranging from a spear phishing attack
to the creation or use of an exploit targeting a
vulnerability.
ICS defenders should at least know what information
is publicly available about their organization through
common search engines such as Google. They should
also know which Internet-connected devices are
deployed from search results from Shodan or similar
tools. It is practical to assume that adversaries already
know whatever was found from an OSINT exercise.
Common Shodan website filters:
Search organization IP range: net:x.x.x.x/y
Search by organization name: org:”name”
Search by IP Address: x.x.x.x
Search by city: city:”name of city”
Search by webpage title: title:”text here”
Search for common remote access: port:"3389"
Common ICS Port: BacNET port:"47808"
Common ICS Port: Modbus port:”502"
Common ICS Port: EtherNet/IP port:”44818"
Ensure that Internet-connected assets are removed
where feasible and that remote access has secure
multi-factor authentication with monitoring and
auditing in place. Verify with the key stakeholders and
applicable on-site teams before changing anything.

Establish and maintain relationships with fire & safety,
physical security, and engineering teams before
arriving to the site. These teams know just about
everything about the facilities – the location of physical
assets, how to navigate the site, network designs, and
critical assets. Your team may have to rely on these
teams to help you throughout the ICS incident
response process going forward.
Site safety is always going to be top of mind, even
above cybersecurity. Follow the lead of the safety team
and the safety protocols to ensure that you and your
team remain physically safe. This also means wearing
your personal protective equipment (PPE). Most sites
require that you have completed safety training and
show certificates of completion before entering a site.

3. Ethically Hack the Physical Security Perimeter

There is a great benefit in organizing direct
discussions in regard to ICS security and safety to
occur on the plant floor or in the facility as this
allows for direct observations and provides
operational context for the environment in which
the digital assets are located. However, some
operating environments may have prohibitive
noise, safety or access limitations that require the
discussions to happen elsewhere. Include the
process engineers, field technicians, programmers,
operators, and managers.
Cybersecurity staff need to know how the physical
processes and plant operate, and which systems
are critical to operations and safety.
Walk the teams through industry case studies such
as CRASHOVERRIDE, TRISIS, HAVEX, STUXNET,
etc..
Start a discussion around what an
impactful event would be for your
environment and how it could be
achieved. The individuals who operate
your facilities, certainly have
thoughts and experiences on how it
has or could fail.
Leverage the physical engineering safety culture by
drawing parallels between physical safety and cyber
“safety” events and highlight the cyber defense
safeguards that are in place to ensure the safety and
reliability of engineering operations.
Reword cyber ‘security ’to cyber
‘safety’ in security awareness memos.

When arriving at the site, there’s always an
opportunity to audit physical security controls.
This can be done by observing authentication
processes, starting with the front gate. Wait to show
a badge until it is requested, document tailgating
observations, and look for unlocked doors, doors
being propped open, fences with gaps, etc., all
while keeping safety as the highest priority.
Conduct passive wireless sweeps looking for rogue
access points and/or unsecured wireless settings.
Always seek documented approvals with
management for ethical hacking exercises
of this nature before attempting them.

2. Coordinate with Safety & Security Teams
4. Plant Floor Cybersecurity Discussions
1. OSINT for ICS Defenders