# 44. Hunt Evil


---
*Page 1*


### Process Hacker

Hacker      View      Tools      Users      Help

Refresh            Options

Processes
Services
Network
Disk

Search Processes (Ctrl+K)

CPU Usage: 4.50%    Physical Memory: 20.67%    Processes: 125

## Name
## System Idle Process
## System
## smss.exe
## Memory Compression
## Interrupts
## Secure System
## csrss.exe
## csrss.exe
## wininit.exe
## services.exe
## svchost.exe
## ShellExperienceHost.exe
## SearchUI.exe
## RuntimeBroker.exe
## RuntimeBroker.exe
## WmiPrvSE.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## sihost.exe
## taskhostw.exe
## svchost.exe
## ctfmon.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## audiodg.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## spoolsv.exe
## svchost.exe
## svchost.exe
## SecurityHealthService.exe
## MsMpEng.exe
## NisSrv.exe
## SearchIndexer.exe
## svchost.exe
## lsaiso.exe
## lsass.exe
## fontdrvhost.exe
## winlogon.exe
## fontdrvhost.exe
## dwm.exe
## explorer.exe
## MSASCuiL.exe
## OneDrive.exe
## powershell.exe
## conhost.exe

## Hunt Evil

## P O S T E R

## dfir.sans.org

Process listing from Windows 10 Enterprise

## Find Evil – Know Normal

### Knowing what’s normal on a Windows host helps cut through the noise to quickly locate potential malware.
### Use the information below as a reference to know what’s normal in Windows and to focus your attention on the outliers.

Image Path:  N/A for system.exe – Not generated from an executable image
Parent Process:  None
Number of Instances:  One
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  At boot time
Description:  The System process is responsible for most kernel-mode threads.
Modules run under System are primarily drivers (.sys ﬁles), but also include
several important DLLs as well as the kernel executable, ntoskrnl.exe.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\smss.exe
Parent Process:  System
Number of Instances:  One master instance and another child instance per
session.  Children exit after creating their session.
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time for the master instance
Description:  The Session Manager process is responsible for creating new
sessions.  The ﬁrst instance creates a child instance for each new session.
Once the child instance initializes the new session by starting the Windows
subsystem (csrss.exe) and wininit.exe for Session 0 or winlogon.exe
for Session 1 and higher, the child instance exits.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\wininit.exe
Parent Process:  Created by an instance of smss.exe that exits, so tools
usually do not provide the parent process name.
Number of Instances:  One
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time
Description:  Wininit.exe starts key background processes within Session 0.
It starts the Service Control Manager (services.exe), the Local Security
Authority process (lsass.exe), and lsaiso.exe for systems with Credential
Guard enabled.  Note that prior to Windows 10, the Local Session Manager
process (lsm.exe) was also started by wininit.exe.  As of Windows 10, that
functionality has moved to a service DLL (lsm.dll) hosted by svchost.exe.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\RuntimeBroker.exe
Parent Process:  svchost.exe
Number of Instances:  One or more
User Account:  Typically the logged-on user(s)
Start Time:  Start times vary greatly
Description:  RuntimeBroker.exe acts as a proxy between the constrained
Universal Windows Platform (UWP) apps (formerly called Metro apps) and the
full Windows API.  UWP apps have limited capability to interface with hardware
and the ﬁle system.  Broker processes such as RuntimeBroker.exe
are therefore used to provide the necessary level of access for UWP
apps.  Generally, there will be one RuntimeBroker.exe for each UWP
app.  For example, starting Calculator.exe will cause a corresponding
RuntimeBroker.exe process to initiate.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\taskhostw.exe
Parent Process:  svchost.exe
Number of Instances:  One or more
User Account:  Multiple taskhostw.exe processes are normal.  One or more may
be owned by logged-on users and/or by local service accounts.
Start Time:  Start times vary greatly
Description:  The generic host process for Windows Tasks.  Upon initialization,
taskhostw.exe runs a continuous loop listening for trigger events.  Example
trigger events that can initiate a task include a deﬁned schedule, user logon,
system startup, idle CPU time, a Windows log event, workstation lock, or
workstation unlock.
There are more than 160 tasks preconﬁgured on a default installation of
Windows 10 Enterprise (though many are disabled).  All executable ﬁles (DLLs &
EXEs) used by the default Windows 10 scheduled tasks are signed by Microsoft.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\winlogon.exe
Parent Process:  Created by an instance of smss.exe that exits, so analysis
tools usually do not provide the parent process name.
Number of Instances:  One or more
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time for the ﬁrst instance (for Session 1).
Start times for additional instances occur as new sessions are created, typically
through Remote Desktop or Fast User Switching logons.
Description:  Winlogon handles interactive user logons and logoffs.  It launches
LogonUI.exe, which uses a credential provider to gather credentials from the
user, and then passes the credentials to lsass.exe for validation.  Once the
user is authenticated, Winlogon loads the user’s NTUSER.DAT into HKCU and
starts the user’s shell (usually explorer.exe) via userinit.exe.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\csrss.exe
Parent Process:  Created by an instance of smss.exe that exits, so analysis tools usually do not provide the parent
process name.
Number of Instances:  Two or more
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time for the ﬁrst two instances (for Session 0 and 1).  Start times for additional
instances occur as new sessions are created, although often only Sessions 0 and 1 are created.
Description:  The Client/Server Run-Time Subsystem is the user-mode process for the Windows subsystem.  Its duties
include managing processes and threads, importing many of the DLLs that provide the Windows API, and facilitating
shutdown of the GUI during system shutdown.  An instance of csrss.exe will run for each session. Session 0 is for
services and Session 1 for the local console session.  Additional sessions are created through the use of Remote
Desktop and/or Fast User Switching.  Each new session results in a new instance of csrss.exe.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\services.exe
Parent Process:  wininit.exe
Number of Instances:  One
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time
Description:  Implements the Uniﬁed Background Process Manager (UBPM), which is responsible for background
activities such as services and scheduled tasks.  Services.exe also implements the Service Control Manager (SCM),
which speciﬁcally handles the loading of services and device drivers marked for auto-start. In addition, once a user
has successfully logged on interactively, the SCM (services.exe) considers the boot successful and sets the Last
Known Good control set (HKLM\SYSTEM\Select\LastKnownGood) to the value of the CurrentControlSet.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\system32\svchost.exe
Parent Process:  services.exe (most often)
Number of Instances:  Many (generally at least 10)
User Account:  Varies depending on svchost instance, though it typically will be Local System, Network Service, or
Local Service accounts.  Windows 10 also has some instances running as logged-on users.
Start Time:  Typically within seconds of boot time.  However, services can be started after boot (e.g., at logon), which
results in new instances of svchost.exe after boot time.
Description:  Generic host process for Windows services.  It is used for running service DLLs.  Windows will
run multiple instances of svchost.exe, each using a unique “-k” parameter for grouping similar services.
Typical “-k” parameters include DcomLaunch, RPCSS, LocalServiceNetworkRestricted, LocalServiceNoNetwork,
LocalServiceAndNoImpersonation, netsvcs, NetworkService, and more. Malware authors often take advantage of the
ubiquitous nature of svchost.exe and use it either to host a malicious DLL as a service, or run a malicious process
named svchost.exe or similar spelling. Beginning in Windows 10 version 1703, Microsoft changed the default
grouping of similar services if the system has more than 3.5 GB of RAM.  In such cases, most services will run under
their own instance of svchost.exe.  On systems with more than 3.5 GB RAM, expect to see more than 50 instances of
svchost.exe (the screenshot in the poster is a Windows 10 VM with 3 GB RAM).

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\lsaiso.exe
Parent Process:  wininit.exe
Number of Instances:  Zero or one
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time
Description:  When Credential Guard is enabled, the functionality of lsass.exe is split between two processes –
itself and lsaiso.exe.  Most of the functionality stays within lsass.exe, but the important role of safely storing
account credentials moves to lsaiso.exe.  It provides safe storage by running in a context that is isolated from other
processes through hardware virtualization technology.  When remote authentication is required, lsass.exe proxies
the requests using an RPC channel with lsaiso.exe in order to authenticate the user to the remote service.  Note
that if Credential Guard is not enabled, lsaiso.exe should not be running on the system.

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\System32\lsass.exe
Parent Process:  wininit.exe
Number of Instances:  One
User Account:  Local System
Start Time:  Within seconds of boot time
Description:  The Local Security Authentication Subsystem Service process is responsible for authenticating users by
calling an appropriate authentication package speciﬁed in HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa.
Typically, this will be Kerberos for domain accounts or MSV1_0 for local accounts. In addition to authenticating users,
lsass.exe is also responsible for implementing the local security policy (such as password policies and audit
policies) and for writing events to the security event log. Only one instance of this process should occur and it should
rarely have child processes (EFS is a known exception).

Image Path:  %SystemRoot%\explorer.exe
Parent Process:  Created by an instance of userinit.exe that exits, so analysis tools usually do not provide the
parent process name.
Number of Instances:  One or more per interactively logged-on user
User Account:  <logged-on user(s)>
Start Time:  First instance starts when the owner’s interactive logon begins
Description:  At its core, Explorer provides users access to ﬁles.  Functionally, though, it is both a ﬁle browser
via Windows Explorer (though still explorer.exe) and a user interface providing features such as the user’s
Desktop, the Start Menu, the Taskbar, the Control Panel, and application launching via ﬁle extension associations
and shortcut ﬁles.  Explorer.exe is the default user interface speciﬁed in the Registry value HKLM\SOFTWARE\
Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Winlogon\Shell, though Windows can alternatively function with
another interface such as cmd.exe or powershell.exe. Notice that the legitimate explorer.exe resides in the
%SystemRoot% directory rather than %SystemRoot%\System32. Multiple instances per user can occur, such as
when the option "Launch folder windows in a separate process" is enabled.

$25.00
DFPS_FOR508_v4.7_01-21

Poster was created by Rob Lee and Mike Pilkington
with support of the SANS DFIR Faculty
©2021 Rob Lee and Mike Pilkington. All Rights Reserved.

### OPERATING
### SYSTEM &
### DEVICE
### IN-DEPTH

### INCIDENT
### RESPONSE
### & THREAT
### HUNTING

FOR500
Windows Forensics

GCFE

FOR518
Mac and iOS
Forensic Analysis
and Incident
Response

FOR308
Digital Forensics
Essentials

FOR585
Smartphone Forensic
Analysis In-Depth

GASF

FOR508
Advanced Incident
Response, Threat Hunting,
and Digital Forensics
GCFA

FOR572
Advanced Network
Forensics: Threat
Hunting, Analysis, and
Incident Response
GNFA

FOR578
Cyber Threat Intelligence
GCTI

FOR610
REM: Malware Analysis
GREM

SEC504
Hacker Tools,
Techniques, Exploits,
and Incident Handling
GCIH

FOR498
Battleﬁeld Forensics
& Data Acquisition

GBFA

sansforensics
@sansforensics
dﬁr.to/MAIL-LIST

---
*Page 2*


## Hunt Evil: Lateral Movement

### During incident response and threat hunting, it is critical to understand how attackers move around your network. Lateral movement is an inescapable requirement for attackers to stealthily
### move from system to system and accomplish their objectives. Every adversary, including the most skilled, will use some form of lateral movement technique described here during a breach.
### Understanding lateral movement tools and techniques allows responders to hunt more efﬁciently, quickly perform incident response scoping, and better anticipate future attacker activity.

### Tools and techniques to hunt the artifacts described below are detailed in the SANS DFIR course FOR508: Advanced Digital Forensics, Incident Response, and Threat Hunting

### RecentApps

Description:
Program execution launched on the Win10
system is tracked in the RecentApps key

Location:
Win10
NTUSER.DAT\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
Current Version\Search\RecentApps

Interpretation:
Each GUID key points to a recent application.
AppID = Name of Application
LastAccessTime = Last execution time in UTC
LaunchCount = Number of times executed

### Jump Lists

Description:
•  The Windows 7-10 task bar (Jump List) is engineered
to allow users to “jump” or access items they have
frequently or recently used quickly and easily.  This
functionality cannot only include recent media ﬁles;
it must also include recent tasks.
•  The data stored in the AutomaticDestinations folder
will each have a unique ﬁle prepended with the
AppID of the associated application.

Location:
Win7/8/10
C:\%USERPROFILE%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\
Windows\Recent\AutomaticDestinations

Interpretation:
•  First time of execution of application.
-  Creation Time = First time item added to the
AppID ﬁle.
•  Last time of execution of application with ﬁle open.
-  Modiﬁcation Time = Last time item added to the
AppID ﬁle.
•  List of Jump List IDs ->
www.forensicswiki.org/wiki/List_of_Jump_List_IDs

\

on.

UTC

d

Descrip

•

The W

to all

frequ

func

it m

•

The

wi

Ap

Lo

W

C

Wi

In

•

Fi

-

C

A

•

Las

-

Mo

App

•

List o

www.f

### ShimCache

Description:
•  Windows Application Compatibility Database is used by
Windows to identify possible application compatibility
challenges with executables.
•  Tracks the executables’ ﬁle name, ﬁle size, last modiﬁed time

Location:
Win7/8/10
SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\
AppCompatCache

Interpretation:
Any executable run on the Windows system could be found
in this key.  You can use this key to identify systems that
speciﬁc malware was executed on.  In addition, based on the
interpretation of the time-based data you might be able to
determine the last time of execution or activity on the system.
•  Windows 7/8/10 contains at most 1,024 entries
- LastUpdateTime does not exist on Win7/8/10 systems

er

\

### Prefetch

Description:
•  Increases performance of a system by pre-loading code
pages of commonly used applications.  Cache Manager
monitors all ﬁles and directories referenced for each
application or process and maps them into a .pf ﬁle.
Utilized to know an application was executed on a system.
• Limited to 128 ﬁles on Win7
• Limited to 1024 ﬁles on Win8-10
• (exename)-(hash).pf

Location:
Win7/8/10
C:\Windows\Prefetch

Interpretation:
•  Each .pf will include last time of execution, number
of times run, and device and ﬁle handles used by the
program
•  Date/Time ﬁle by that name and path was ﬁrst executed
- Creation Date of .pf ﬁle (-10 seconds)
•  Date/Time ﬁle by that name and path was last executed
- Embedded last execution time of .pf ﬁle
- Last modiﬁcation date of .pf ﬁle (-10 seconds)
-  Win8-10 will contain last 8 times of execution

Descrip

Progra

system

Locat

Win1

NTUS

Curr

Int

Ea

Ap

L

La

### UserAssist

Description:
GUI-based programs launched from the desktop are tracked in the
launcher on a Windows System.

Location:
NTUSER.DAT HIVE
NTUSER.DAT\Software\Microsoft\Windows\Currentversion\
Explorer\UserAssist\{GUID}\Count

Interpretation:
All values are ROT-13 Encoded
•  GUID for Win7/8/10
-   CEBFF5CD    Executable File Execution
-   F4E57C4B    Shortcut File Execution

### BAM/DAM

Description:
Windows Background Activity Moderator (BAM)

Location:
Win10
SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\bam\UserSettings\{SID}
SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\dam\UserSettings\{SID}

Investigative Notes
Provides full path of the executable ﬁle that was run on the
system and last execution date/time

## Evidence
## of Program
## Execution

m.

### Amcache.hve

Description:
ProgramDataUpdater (a task associated with the
Application Experience Service) uses the registry ﬁle
Amcache.hve to store data during process creation

Location:
Win7/8/10
C:\Windows\AppCompat\Programs\Amcache.hve
(Windows 7/8/10)

Interpretation:
•  Amcache.hve – Keys =
Amcache.hve\Root\File\{Volume GUID}\#######
•  Entry for every executable run, full path information, File’s
$StandardInfo Last Modiﬁcation Time, and Disk volume
the executable was run from
• First Run Time = Last Modiﬁcation Time of Key
• SHA1 hash of executable also contained in the key

## REMOTE ACCESS
### SOURCE
### DESTINATION

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying
alternate credentials
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

Microsoft-Windows-
SmbClient%4Security.evtx
31001 – Failed logon to
destination
Destination Host Name
User Name for failed logon
Reason code for failed
destination logon (e.g. bad
password)

MountPoints2 – Remotely mapped shares
NTUSER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
CurrentVersion\Explorer\MountPoints2

Shellbags – USRCLASS.DAT
Remote folders accessed inside an interactive session via
Explorer by attackers

ShimCache – SYSTEM
net.exe
net1.exe

BAM/DAM – NTUSER.DAT – Last Time Executed
net.exe
net1.exe

AmCache.hve – First Time Executed
net.exe
net1.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
net.exe-{hash}.pf
net1.exe-{hash}.pf

User Proﬁle Artifacts
Review shortcut ﬁles and jumplists for
remote ﬁles accessed by attackers, if they
had interactive access (RDP)

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

Security Event Log –
security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 3
Source IP/Logon User Name
4672
Logon User Name
Logon by user with
administrative rights
Requirement for accessing
default shares such as C$
and ADMIN$
4776 – NTLM  if authenticating
to Local System
Source Host Name/Logon
User Name

File Creation
Attacker's ﬁles (malware) copied to
destination system
Look for Modiﬁed Time before
Creation Time
Creation Time is time of ﬁle copy

4768 – TGT Granted
Source Host Name/Logon User
Name
Available only on domain controller
4769 – Service Ticket Granted if
authenticating to Domain Controller
Destination Host Name/Logon User
Name
Source IP
Available only on domain controller
5140
Share Access
5145
Auditing of shared ﬁles – NOISY!

net use z: \\host\c$ /user:domain\username <password>

### Map Network Shares
### (net.exe)
### to C$ or Admin$

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying alternate
credentials - if NLA enabled on
destination
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

Microsoft-Windows-
TerminalServices-
RDPClient%4Operational.evtx
1024
Destination Host Name
1102
Destination IP Address

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

Remote desktop destinations
are tracked per-user
NTUSER\Software\
Microsoft\Terminal
Server Client\Servers

ShimCache – SYSTEM
mstsc.exe Remote
Desktop Client

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM – Last
Time Executed
mstsc.exe  Remote
Desktop Client

AmCache.hve – First Time
Executed
mstsc.exe

UserAssist – NTUSER.DAT
mstsc.exe  Remote
Desktop Client execution
Last Time Executed
Number of Times Executed

RecentApps – NTUSER.DAT
mstsc.exe  Remote
Desktop Client execution
Last Time Executed
Number of Times Executed
RecentItems subkey tracks
connection destinations and
times

Jumplists – C:\Users\<Username>\
AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\
Recent\AutomaticDestinations\
{MSTSC-APPID}-
automaticDestinations-ms
Tracks remote desktop connection
destination and times

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
mstsc.exe-{hash}.pf

Bitmap Cache – C:\USERS\<USERNAME>\
AppData\Local\Microsoft\Terminal
Server Client\Cache
bcache##.bmc
cache####.bin

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

Security Event Log –
security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 10
Source IP/Logon User Name
4778/4779
IP Address of Source/Source
System Name
Logon User Name

Microsoft-Windows-
RemoteDesktopServices-
RdpCoreTS%4Operational.evtx
131 – Connection Attempts
Source IP
98 – Successful Connections

Microsoft-Windows-Terminal
Services-RemoteConnection
Manager%4Operational.evtx
1149
Source IP/Logon User Name
•  Blank user name may indicate
use of Sticky Keys

Microsoft-Windows-Terminal
Services-LocalSession
Manager%4Operational.evtx
21, 22, 25
Source IP/Logon User Name
41
Logon User Name

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
rdpclip.exe-{hash}.pf
tstheme.exe-{hash}.pf

ShimCache  – SYSTEM

rdpclip.exe
tstheme.exe

AmCache.hve –
First Time Executed

rdpclip.exe
tstheme.exe

### Remote Desktop

## REMOTE EXECUTION
### SOURCE
### DESTINATION

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying alternate
credentials
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

ShimCache – SYSTEM
at.exe
schtasks.exe

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM – Last
Time Executed
at.exe
schtasks.exe

AmCache.hve -
First Time Executed
at.exe
schtasks.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
at.exe-{hash}.pf
schtasks.exe-{hash}.pf

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 3
Source IP/Logon User Name
4672
Logon User Name
Logon by a user with
administrative rights
Requirement for accessing
default shares such as C$ and
ADMIN$

4698 – Scheduled task created
4702 – Scheduled task updated
4699 – Scheduled task deleted
4700/4701 – Scheduled task
enabled/disabled

Microsoft-Windows-Task
Scheduler%4Operational.evtx
106 – Scheduled task created
140 – Scheduled task updated
141 – Scheduled task deleted
200/201 – Scheduled task
executed/completed

File Creation
evil.exe
Job ﬁles created in
C:\Windows\Tasks
XML task ﬁles created in
C:\Windows\System32\Tasks
Author tag under "RegistrationInfo"
can identify:
•  Source system name
• Creator username

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
evil.exe-{hash}.pf

SOFTWARE

Microsoft\Windows
NT\CurrentVersion\
Schedule\TaskCache\Tasks
Microsoft\Windows
NT\CurrentVersion\
Schedule\TaskCache\Tree\

ShimCache – SYSTEM

evil.exe

AmCache.hve –
First Time Executed

evil.exe

### Scheduled Tasks

at \\host 13:00 "c:\temp\evil.exe"
schtasks /CREATE /TN taskname /TR c:\temp\evil.exe /SC once /RU “SYSTEM” /ST 13:00 /S host /U username

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

ShimCache – SYSTEM
sc.exe

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM – Last Time Executed
sc.exe

AmCache.hve – First Time Executed
sc.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
sc.exe-{hash}.pf

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 3
Source IP/Logon User Name
4697
Security records service install,
if enabled
Enabling non-default Security
events such as ID 4697 are
particularly useful if only the
Security logs are forwarded to a
centralized log server

system.evtx
7034 – Service crashed
unexpectedly
7035 – Service sent a Start/Stop
control
7036 – Service started or stopped
7040 – Start type changed (Boot
| On Request | Disabled)
7045 – A service was installed on
the system

File Creation
evil.exe or evil.dll malicious
service executable or service DLL

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
evil.exe-{hash}.pf

SYSTEM

\CurrentControlSet\
Services\
New service creation

ShimCache – SYSTEM

evil.exe
ShimCache records
existence of malicious
service executable, unless
implemented as a service DLL

AmCache.hve –
First Time Executed

evil.exe

### Services

sc \\host create servicename binpath= “c:\temp\evil.exe”
sc \\host start servicename

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying
alternate credentials
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

Microsoft-Windows-
WinRM%4Operational.evtx
6 – WSMan Session initialize
Session created
Destination Host Name or IP
Current logged-on User Name

8, 15, 16, 33 – WSMan Session
deinitialization
Closing of WSMan session
Current logged-on User Name

Microsoft-Windows-
PowerShell%4Operational.evtx
40961, 40962
Records the local initiation
of powershell.exe and
associated user account
8193 & 8194
Session created
8197 - Connect
Session closed

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

ShimCache – SYSTEM
powershell.exe

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM –
Last Time Executed
powershell.exe

AmCache.hve – First
Time Executed
powershell.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
powershell.exe-{hash}.pf
PowerShell scripts (.ps1 ﬁles) that run within
10 seconds of powershell.exe launching will be
tracked in powershell.exe prefetch ﬁle

Command history
C:\USERS\<USERNAME>\AppData\Roaming\
Microsoft\Windows\PowerShell\
PSReadline\ConsoleHost_history.txt
With PS v5+, a history ﬁle with previous 4096
commands is maintained per user

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 3
Source IP/Logon User Name
4672
Logon User Name
Logon by an a user with
administrative rights

Microsoft-Windows-
PowerShell%4Operational.evtx
4103, 4104 – Script Block logging
Logs suspicious scripts by
default in PS v5
Logs all scripts if conﬁgured
53504 Records the authenticating
user

Windows PowerShell.evtx
400/403  "ServerRemoteHost"
indicates start/end of Remoting
session
800  Includes partial script code

Microsoft-Windows-
WinRM%4Operational.evtx
91  Session creation
168  Records the authenticating
user

File Creation
evil.exe
With Enter-PSSession, a user
proﬁle directory may be created

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
evil.exe-{hash].pf
wsmprovhost.exe-{hash].pf

ShimCache – SYSTEM

wsmprovhost.exe
evil.exe

SOFTWARE

Microsoft\PowerShell\1
\ShellIds\Microsoft.
PowerShell\
ExecutionPolicy

Attacker may change
execution policy to a less
restrictive setting, such as
"bypass"

AmCache.hve –
First Time Executed

wsmprovhost.exe
evil.exe

powershell.exe wsmprovhost.exe

Enter-PSSession –ComputerName host
Invoke-Command –ComputerName host –ScriptBlock {Start-Process c:\temp\evil.exe}

### PowerShell Remoting

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying alternate
credentials
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

ShimCache – SYSTEM
wmic.exe

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM – Last Time Executed
wmic.exe

AmCache.hve – First Time Executed
wmic.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
wmic.exe-{hash}.pf

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4624 Logon Type 3
Source IP/Logon User Name
4672
Logon User Name
Logon by an a user with
administrative rights

Microsoft-Windows-WMI-
Activity%4Operational.evtx
5857
Indicates time of wmiprvse execution
and path to provider DLL – attackers
sometimes install malicious WMI
provider DLLs
5860, 5861
Registration of Temporary (5860) and
Permanent (5861) Event Consumers.
Typically used for persistence, but
can be used for remote execution.

File Creation
evil.exe
evil.mof – .mof ﬁles can be used
to manage the WMI Repository

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
scrcons.exe-{hash}.pf
mofcomp.exe-{hash}.pf
wmiprvse.exe-{hash}.pf
evil.exe-{hash}.pf

Unauthorized changes to the
WMI Repository in C:\Windows\
System32\wbem\Repository

ShimCache – SYSTEM

scrcons.exe
mofcomp.exe
wmiprvse.exe
evil.exe

AmCache.hve –
First Time Executed

scrcons.exe
mofcomp.exe
wmiprvse.exe
evil.exe

wmic.exe
wmiprvse.exe

wmic /node:host process call create "C:\temp\evil.exe"
Invoke-WmiMethod –Computer host –Class Win32_Process –Name create –Argument “c:\temp\evil.exe"

### WMI/WMIC

security.evtx
4648 – Logon specifying
alternate credentials
Current logged-on User Name
Alternate User Name
Destination Host Name/IP
Process Name

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

NTUSER.DAT
Software\SysInternals\PsExec\EulaAccepted

ShimCache – SYSTEM
psexec.exe

BAM/DAM – SYSTEM – Last Time Executed
psexec.exe

AmCache.hve – First Time Executed
psexec.exe

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
psexec.exe-{hash}.pf
Possible references to other ﬁles accessed
by psexec.exe, such as executables copied to
target system with the “-c” option

File Creation
psexec.exe ﬁle downloaded and created on
local host as the ﬁle is not native to Windows

EVENT LOGS
FILE SYSTEM
REGISTRY

security.evtx
4648 Logon specifying alternate credentials
Connecting User Name
Process Name
4624 Logon Type 3 (and Type 2 if “-u” Alternate Credentials are used)
Source IP/Logon User Name
4672
Logon User Name
Logon by a user with administrative rights
Requirement for access default shares such as C$ and ADMIN$
5140 – Share Access
ADMIN$ share used by PsExec

system.evtx
7045
Service Install

Prefetch – C:\Windows\Prefetch\
psexesvc.exe-{hash}.pf
evil.exe-{hash}.pf

File Creation
User proﬁle directory structure
created unless “-e” option used
psexesvc.exe will be placed in
ADMIN$ (\Windows) by default, as
well as other executables (evil.exe)
pushed by PsExec

New service creation
conﬁgured in SYSTEM\
CurrentControlSet\
Services\PSEXESVC

“-r” option can allow
attacker to rename service

ShimCache – SYSTEM

psexesvc.exe

AmCache.hve
First Time Executed

psexesvc.exe

### PsExec

psexec.exe
psexesvc.exe

psexec.exe \\host -accepteula -d -c c:\temp\evil.exe

### Additional Event Logs

Process-tracking events, Sysmon, and similar logging
capabilities are not listed here for the sake of brevity.
However, this type of enhanced logging can provide
signiﬁcant visibility of an intruder’s lateral movement, given
that the logs are not overwritten or otherwise deleted.

### Additional FileSystem Artifacts

Deep-dive analysis techniques such as ﬁle
carving, volume shadow analysis, and NTFS log
ﬁle analysis can be instrumental in recovering
many of these artifacts (including the recovery
of registry and event log ﬁles and records).

### Artifacts in Memory Analysis

Artifacts in memory analysis will allow for additional tracking of potential evidence of execution and command line
history. We recommend auditing and dumping the "conhost" processes on the various systems. Example:
vol.py -f memory.img --profile=<profile> memdump -n conhost --dump-dir=.
strings -t d -e l *.dmp >> conhost.uni

Perform searches for executable keywords using grep. Also check running processes (mstsc, rdpclip, etc.).

### Additional References

SANS DFIR FOR508 course: http://sans.org/FOR508

ATT&CK Lateral Movement: http://for508.com/attck-lm

JPCERT Lateral Movement: http://for508.com/jpcert-lm