# 47. Cyber Threat Intelligence Consumption


---
*Page 1*


## The Active Cyber Defense Cycle is a model to consume threat intelligence.
## It focuses on bridging various security teams to take a security operations focus on
## identifying and countering threats. It can start at any phase of the cycle, with the phases
## continually feeding into one another in order to create an ongoing process.

## Network Security
## Monitoring

## Incident
## Response

## Threat &
## Environment
## Manipulation

## Threat
## Intelligence
## Consumption

### Threat Intelligence Consumption analysts

### should be aware of their organizational

### goals and needs as well as the information

### attack space.  They should be able to look

### into the wide range of threat intelligence

### available and ﬁnd what is relevant to their

### organization.  Information such as IOCs can

### be found to help search for threats in the

### environment.

### Threat and Environment Manipulation

### analysts often perform activities such as

### malware analysis; however, the threat

### does not always use malware.  Analyzing

### the threat allows for the creation of better

### IOCs and an understanding of the threat

### and its impact on the environment and the

### organization.  Recommending changes to the

### environment when possible – such as ﬁxing

### a vulnerability or making a logical change

### like DNS sinkholing – can help reduce threat

### effectiveness.

### Network Security Monitoring focuses on

### hunting threats in the environment and is

### comprised of three phases: collect, detect,

### and analyze.  In the collect phase analysts

### should gather data from the environment

### such as network trafﬁc, system logs, and

### security device logs.  In the detect phase

### analysts should look for abnormalities and

### use adversary IOCs and TTPs to hunt for

### adversaries.  The analyze phase helps to

### conﬁrm that the threats are real and not a

### false positive.  This helps reduce incident

### response false positives.

### Incident Response should focus on scoping

### the impact of the threat and any malicious

### activity while containing and eradicating the

### threat.  IOCs should be used to understand

### and ﬁx the true scope of the problem to

### avoid reinfections.

## Active Cyber Defense Cycle

## There are three levels of threat intelligence: strategic,

## operational, and tactical. The levels should be used as

## a reference guide to remember that different audiences

## have different requirements of threat intelligence.

### Strategic-level players such as executives and policymakers should look for an

### understanding of the wider threat landscape to identify the risk to the organization

### and changes that can be made in investments or the corporate culture.

### Operational-level personnel should look to translate strategic objectives into tactical efforts and vice versa by identifying the

### overarching goals or trends of an operation or campaign.  They should also aim to be aware of adversary campaigns instead of single

### intrusions, identify organizational knowledge gaps, and share information with peer organizations to alleviate those knowledge gaps.

### Tactical-level intelligence is often consumed in the form of indicators of compromise (IOCs) and tactics,

### techniques, and procedures (TTPs).  This helps drive the security of an organization and enable it to hunt down

### threats and better respond to them.  Consider using models such as the Active Cyber Defense Cycle.

### FOR578:
### Cyber Threat Intelligence
### sans.org/FOR578

$25.00
DFPS_FOR578_v1.6_01-21

Poster was created by SANS instructor Robert M. Lee
with support from SANS DFIR faculty
©2021 Robert M. Lee. All Rights Reserved.
## digital-forensics.sans.org

### OPERATING
### SYSTEM &
### DEVICE
### IN-DEPTH

### INCIDENT
### RESPONSE
### & THREAT
### HUNTING

FOR500
Windows Forensics

GCFE

FOR518
Mac and iOS
Forensic Analysis
and Incident
Response

FOR308
Digital Forensics
Essentials

FOR585
Smartphone Forensic
Analysis In-Depth

GASF

FOR508
Advanced Incident
Response, Threat Hunting,
and Digital Forensics
GCFA

FOR572
Advanced Network
Forensics: Threat
Hunting, Analysis, and
Incident Response
GNFA

FOR578
Cyber Threat Intelligence
GCTI

FOR610
REM: Malware Analysis
GREM

SEC504
Hacker Tools,
Techniques, Exploits,
and Incident Handling
GCIH

FOR498
Battleﬁeld Forensics
& Data Acquisition

GBFA

sansforensics
@sansforensics
dﬁr.to/MAIL-LIST

---
*Page 2*


## Organizations that want to generate threat intelligence should have well

## established security practices and be able to gather data from successful and

## attempted intrusions into their organizations. Generating threat intelligence

## should start with clear requirements and proceed to taking advantage of internal

## knowledge, such as intrusion data, and external knowledge, such as openly

## available reports and information. They key is empowering trained analysts to

## interpret information and produce knowledge about observed threats while

## detailing technical information that can be used to help enhance security

## operations and incident response.

## What is a TTP?

### An adversary tactic, technique, or procedure (TTP) is the means
### by which adversaries accomplish their goals. TTPs often consist
### of patterns of adversary activity that those adversaries routinely
### perform. As an example, if an adversary consistently gains access
### to unauthenticated VPNs in an environment and then leverages
### PowerShell within the environment to steal off intellectual
### property documents, that pattern could be observed as one of
### their TTPs. In the future, if you identify that adversary is using
### PowerShell in your environment, you may want to quickly safeguard
### intellectual property documents while identifying and removing
### unauthenticated VPNs. At a bare minimum TTPs should include
### descriptions of observed adversary activity (such as the analysis of
### indicators) with perceived adversary goals.

## The Diamond Model

### The Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis identiﬁes the four core
### components of any malicious event: the victim, the capability, the
### infrastructure, and the adversary. It is a stand-alone model but can
### also be applied to each phase of the kill chain. Performing this type
### of analysis allows organizations to start with one component they
### can identify (such as the victim) and work towards uncovering the
### other three components. This helps understand adversary motives
### as well as the infrastructure and capabilities they use.

## A Sample Process from SANS FOR578*

### Determine the Intelligence Requirements
### Does the organization need better technical knowledge such as
### IOCs and adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs)
### to increase incident response and threat detection? Or does the
### organization need knowledge about adversary campaigns and
### guidance to executives on the organization’s threat landscape?
### Are these goals speciﬁc to certain threats or to safeguard speciﬁc
### data in the organization? Requirements guide what you collect,
### what and how you analyze it, and the ﬁnal product disseminated.

### Analyze Internal Information
### Have incident responders, enterprise security teams, malware
### analysts, and other members of your organization provided data
### and information on previous intrusions into the organization?
### Analyze the intrusions against models such as the Diamond
### Model or Kill Chain to extract indicators and to identify adversary
### patterns. Organizations should have a minimum of 60 days of
### logs to generate useful data. Lastly, remember that the best data
### is internal to your organization.

### Enrich the Information
### Utilize open-source information with tools such as Google,
### ThreatMiner.org, or professional tools to determine if others
### have seen the technical indicators or adversary TTPs before.
### Attempt to avoid duplicating efforts – use existing information.

### Validate the Information
### Open-source information exists in abundance and it needs
### validating. Not all information is correct or relevant to your
### organization. Simply taking a threat feed or data source and
### using it blindly will generate false positives and overload
### analysts. Have processes for retiring indicators and information
### that is no longer useful. The hoarders’ approach to indicators
### will always fail over time.

### Store the Information
### Store the information using a common format and ensure that
### analysts can also add notes and identify relationships between
### technical indicators. Make sure internal security personnel can
### quickly access and utilize the information. Additionally, seek
### feedback from the consumers to help improve the intelligence
### processes while conﬁrming that the feedback is useful.
### Consider CRITs, MISP, Threat_Note, or professional platforms.
### Always be ready to tailor your storing platforms as they are
### starting places, not out-of-the-box solutions.

### Share the Information
### Translate the common format internal to your organization
### into sharable formats such as STIX/TAXII to make it available
### to peers or government organizations. Ensure that in a
### sharing relationship you get the information back so you
### can use it to validate or enhance your knowledge.

### Productize the Information
### When an intelligence assessment is required, analyze the
### competing sources of information to make assessments
### about the threat and its impact on your organization.
### Utilize models such as Analysis of Competing Hypotheses
### to help defeat analyst biases. Use language such as high,
### medium, and low conﬁdence for your assessments because
### intelligence is always an assessment and not a deﬁnitive
### conclusion. Productized intelligence is usually delivered in
### the form of a report or brieﬁng.

### * FOR578: Cyber Threat Intelligence
### sans.org/FOR578

## The Kill Chain

Reconnaissance is often
performed by adversaries
to research their targets.
This can take place in
the form of scanning or
requests to public-facing
infrastructure. Research
can also be done against
your organization or
personnel without direct
interaction.

Weaponization occurs
when an adversary
readies a tool for use in
the intrusion. This could
be as simple as an exploit
and malware combined
into a PDF document. The
analyst should focus on
the adversary’s choices
of exploits, malware, or
tactics. An adversary’s
choices can act like a
ﬁngerprint across various
intrusions.

Installation is usually
observed when malware
is installed to a system.
However, installation can
also be seen when an
adversary has modiﬁed
native functionality
available in an
environment to maintain
persistence.

Delivery is the step
where a threat delivers
the weaponized
capability into the target
environment. An example
would be a phishing email
with the weaponized PDF
attached. It could also be
something as simple as a
VPN connection directly
in the environment that is
available for abuse by the
adversary.

Command and Control
(C2) servers afford
threats the opportunity
to interact with the
target environment
and communicate with
their tools, such as
malware, or directly
interact with the
systems.

Exploitation is often
manifested in technical
exploits of vulnerabilities
but is not always
vulnerability-focused.
An adversary could
exploit the functionality
of PowerShell in an
environment to gather
data and avoid ever
having to use malware.

Actions are only dictated
by the adversaries and
what is available to
them. The intent of the
adversary is difﬁcult to
determine because the
observed impact may
not have been its intent.
When a threat gets to the
point of completing an
adversary’s actions and
enabling it to reach its
desired goal, the intrusion
is successful.

### The Kill Chain highlights steps that adversaries usually perform to
### complete their objective. It should be used as a reference model
### to understand adversary activity and observable indicators of
### compromise (IOCs). Categorizing and identifying indicators and
### patterns across large numbers of intrusions can reveal connections
### in intrusion activity including an adversary’s campaign.

## References and
## Suggested Reading

### Kill Chain:
http://dﬁr.to/KillChain

### Diamond Model:
http://dﬁr.to/DiamondModel

### The Sliding Scale of Cyber Security:
http://dﬁr.to/SlidingScale