# 50. ICS Assessment Methodology Guide


---
*Page 1*


Information gathered from each phase should be reviewed to
understand the attack surfaces within the control network. These
attack surfaces should be reviewed for publicly documented
vulnerabilities in the technology or service. Control asset
deployments should be reviewed to determine vulnerabilities in
implementation and configuration.
CRITICAL NOTE: Safety is more important than verification.
To evaluate and prioritize risk from vulnerabilities, use the
MITRE ICS ATT&CK Matrix
(https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php/Main_Page)
and the Industrial Control System
Cyber Kill Chain (https://www.sans.org/reading-
room/whitepapers/ICS/industrial-control-system-cyber-kill-
chain-36297). This information can be used to plan patching and
remediation efforts. Many control networks cannot patch for
long periods of time. This situation can be mitigated by
monitoring for activity specific to identifying and exploiting
known vulnerabilities.

This guide covers the basics for an industrial control
sector assessment methodology.  It is intended to be
used to gauge the maturity of a security program
implemented to protect control environments.
The guide concentrates on several primary areas to
help gauge implementation of the current program
and prioritize risk reduction.

Vulnerability Detection

How to Use This Sheet

This quick-start guide will cover the following areas to
organize a security assessment of a control network:
•
Data Gathering
•
Physical Walk-Through
•
Network Isolation and Segmentation
•
Asset Inventory
•
Access Control
•
Vulnerability Identification
•
Purdue Model Levels
•
Assessment vs. Penetration Testing vs. Red Team
•
Common Adversary Targets

Each Purdue level has different requirements associated with
the process and the organization. The following should be
considered when assessing the security of each level:
•
Network Boundaries – Start with corporate network
and control network firewalls and DMZs between
Levels 3 and 4. Lower-numbered levels will have less
network restrictions due to process requirements.
•
Remote Access – Test remote connectivity used by
employees, vendors/integrators, and managed service
providers. This access crosses the network boundaries
and are the highest risk.
•
Virtual Local Area Networks (VLAN) – Test process
segmentation to understand the attack surfaces within
the control network. Management servers at Level 3
should only communicate with specific assets and
services at lower levels. Cross-process communications
should be analyzed to understand these attack surfaces.
•
Wireless Networks – Industrial control networks can
deploy a variety of wireless technologies, including
cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Mesh networking, and other
proprietary and ISM-related technologies.

Network Isolation and Segmentation

### Assessment Methodology

### Quick Start Guide v0.1

SANS ICS
ics.sans.org

By Dean Parsons & Don C. Weber
dparsons@sans.org | don@cutawaysecurity.com

Access control must be implemented to augment network
boundaries. Most control networks cannot adhere to the
credential policies defined for corporate environments.
However, risk is significantly reduced by implementing a few
basic access control concepts. Focus assessment efforts on:
•
Windows Active Directory – Control network AD cannot
have trusted relationships or trusted forests with the
corporate AD. Additionally, user/administrative / service
credentials should not be manually synchronized with the
corporate environment.
•
Windows Group Policy Objects – Review AD Group
policy configurations to understand how the Windows
security control mechanisms are implemented across
Windows servers and workstations.
•
File Shares – Review file shares to understand
implementation and identify assets that can be accessed.
•
Application Access – Review network services that permit
access without authentication or using default credentials.

Access Control

Threat intelligence indicates adversaries are frequently targeting
these ICS devices for harmful impacts.
•
Data Historian – The database system storing industrial
control system (ICS) process information. It is a trusted
asset that may have trusted connections to both IT and ICS,
and it could be abused to pivot from a compromise in IT to
the control network.
•
Programmable Logic Controllers – PLCs interface with
physical hardware in the real world and monitor and change
the state of operations. Controlling the PLCs or their
communications impacts safety and availability.
•
Engineering Workstations – Usually a laptop with the
software to view, manage, and program network devices,
PLCs, RTUs, and other field devices.
•
Network Shares – Engineering documents with details
about the control network, process, configurations, and other
data necessary to understand the process and operations.

Common Adversary Targets

---
*Page 2*


Organizing logging and monitoring within the control
network is most effective when prioritized to address
network events, then system events, and finally the
consolidation, correlation, and evaluation of these events.
The following are several starting points for this discussion.
•
Passive Network Monitoring – Gather system, field
device, and protocol communication information by
monitoring the network using network taps or SPAN
ports. Low risk but may induce changes to network
device configurations and increase CPU utilization.
Monitor carefully and plan rollback.
•
Active Scanning – Gather inventory data by
conducting light and safe network scans to identify
devices on the network. Scanning when connected to
different network segments will most likely be
required. There is a medium to high risk to the process,
and the work should be monitored carefully and in
communication with the operational technology (OT)
team.
•
Service Enumeration – Interactions with network
services are necessary to understand the attack surface.
These interactions should be limited to tools that
understand the protocols and normal functionality of
the service. There is a high risk to the process, and this
work should be performed on small target sets and in
communication with the OT team. Limit to
development/lab equipment when possible.
•
Inventory Correlation – Review discovered assets and
services with inventory tracking.

Asset Inventory

All assessments begin with gathering information about
the organization, the process, and the project scope.
•
Goals of assessment – The OT, IT, and InfoSec
teams should all agree on the scope and purpose of
the assessment. The OT team should determine
when the assessment occurs in order to reduce the
impact on the process.
•
Identify Key Personnel – Understanding the
process comes from interviews with many
individuals: leadership, process engineers,
operators, system/network administrators, vendors
and integrators, and managed service providers.
•
Company OSINT – Online information provides
a lot of information about an organization. Google,
Shodan, LinkedIn, and other websites will
augment understanding of the control network.
•
Policies and Procedures – Control network
policies and procedures, relevant to the scope of
the assessment, provide details about the
expectations of security controls and technology
implementations.
•
Regulations and Requirements – Security
controls and assessment scope can be driven by
specific regulatory requirements.
•
Process Description and Purpose –
Understanding the process and its requirements
helps with threat modeling, attack surface
identification, and testing priorities.
•
Network and Traffic Flow Diagrams – These
documents provide details about what technologies
were intended to be implemented and can be used
to compare the current implementation.
•
Asset Inventories – These documents will provide
details about hardware and software implemented
on the control network. This information should be
used to identify known attack surfaces and
vulnerabilities.

Data Gathering

The security assessment team needs to understand the actual
process that is being tested.
•
Safety Training – Access to process environments
typically requires safety training and personal
protective equipment (PPE). This may involve a simple
form to review and sign, or it could involve an hour or
two of training and testing.
•
Meeting with Leadership and Team – Review scope
and intent with key personnel to ensure agreement and
reduce apprehension.
•
Process Walk-Through – Walk through key areas of
the process to gain an understanding of the actual
process.
•
Control Cabinets – Physically inspect control and
network cabinets to understand how technologies are
deployed, wired, and maintained.
•
Physical Security – Gain an understanding of the
physical security controls and physical security team's
responsibilities.
•
Operators and Engineer Interviews – Interact with
process operators to understand their normal tasks and
their major concerns for the safety of personnel and the
resilience of the process.

Physical Walk-Through

Control networks are typically implemented following the
Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture Model, typically
referred to as the Purdue Model. The following details how
this model organizes assets within the control network:
•
Level 5 - Internet, Cloud Services
•
Level 4 - Enterprise IT Business Systems
•
Level 3 - ICS Plant Site, SCADA Controls
•
Level 2 - HMI, Engineering Workstations
•
Level 1 - Process Control, Field Devices
•
Level 0 - Sensors, Hardware Actuators

Purdue Model Levels

•
Security Assessment – An evaluation of a system or
systems to understand the attack surface and reduce
risk to the control network. Minimal impact and
modifications to assets to gather information.
•
Penetration Test – Testing exploits and weaknesses of
a secured environment to demonstrate risks inherited
from known and discovered vulnerabilities in deployed
assets and services. May negatively impact process.
•
Red Team Assessment – An evaluation of an
organization to determine how skilled adversaries and
threat actors will target and attack the control network.
Actions are similar to penetration test but are more
advanced in actions on target.

Assessment vs. Penetration Test vs. Red Team