# 55. Burp Suite Cheat Sheet


---
*Page 1*


Ctrl-I - Send to Intruder
Ctrl-R - Send to Repeater
Ctrl-S - Search (places cursor in
search field)
Ctrl-. - Go to next selection
Ctrl-m - Go to previous selection
Ctrl-A - Select all
Ctrl-Z - Undo
Ctrl-Y - Redo

Global Hotkeys

Purpose

This cheat sheet enables users of Burp Suite with

quicker operations and more ease of use.
Burp Suite is the de-facto penetration testing tool for
assessing web applications. It enables penetration
testers to rapidly test applications via signature
features like repeater, intruder, sequencer, and
extender.

It is split into two pages, one page containing
common shortcuts to use within the application, the
second page containing useful extensions and tips-
and-tricks. It is recommended to manually check and
test the different extensions available in the product;
many which may be very useful to your testing, but
outside of what this cheat sheet can cover.

Burp Suite comes in a free community edition and a
commercial professional edition. It has a built in
Chromium browser for easy set-up of HTTP and
SSL/TLS interception.

POCKET REFERENCE GUIDE

Ctrl-Shift-T - Target Tab
Ctrl-Shift-P - Proxy Tab
Ctrl-Shift-R - Repeater Tab
Ctrl-Shift-I - Intruder Tab
Ctrl-Shift-O - Project Options Tab
Ctrl-Shift-D - Dashboard Tab
Ctrl-Equal - next tab
Ctrl-Minus - previous tab

Navigational Hotkeys

Ctrl-B - Base64 selection
Ctrl-Shift-B - Base64 decode selection
Ctrl-H - Replace with HTML Entities
(key characters only)
Ctrl-Shift-H - Replace HTML entities
with characters
Ctrl-U - URL encode selection (key
characters only)
Ctrl-Shift-U - URL decode selection

Editor Encoding / Decoding Hotkeys

## Burp Suite
## Cheat Sheet v1.0

By Chris Dale @chrisadale

sans.org/offensive-operations

Ctrl-F – Forward Request (Proxy)
Ctrl-T - Toggle Proxy Intercept On and
Off
Ctrl-Space - Send Request (Repeater)
Double-click <TAB> - Rename a tab

Tool Specific Hotkeys

Editors Hotkeys

Ctrl-Delete - Delete Word
Ctrl-D - Delete Line
Ctrl-Backspace - Delete Word Backwards
Ctrl-Home - Go to beginning of document
Ctrl-Shift-Home - Go to beginning of
document and select data on its way
Ctrl-End - Go to end of document
Ctrl-Shift-End - Go to end of document
and select data on its way
Ctrl-Left - Go to Previous Word
Ctrl-Shift-Left - Go to Previous Word
and select data on its way
Ctrl-Right - Go to Next Word
Ctrl-Shift-Right - Go to Next Word and
select data on its way

The collaborator enables the
penetration tester to listen for call-
backs from vulnerable scripts and
services via auto-generation of unique
DNS names and works on the following
protocols:

- DNS
- HTTP & HTTPS
- SMTP & SMTPS
Use the Burp extension Taborator to
make Burp Collaborator easier to use
on-the-fly.

Burp Collaborator

---
*Page 2*


Rest API

Users can contribute with extensions to aid in the
discovery of vulnerabilities. Be aware of false-
positives and use your pentesting capabilities to
ensure you fully explore the findings.
Param Miner
Allows high-performance identifying of unlinked
parameters. Check for unlinked GET and Headers,
and unlinked POST when applicable.
Backslash Powered Scanner
Will give alerts on interesting transformations of data
or other interesting things. Often, it will be false-
positives, but it allows the penetration tester to focus
on potential vulnerabilities.
Software Vulnerability scanner
Checks software version numbers against
vulnhub.com for vulnerabilities.

Hunting for Vulnerabilities 1/2

These extensions are helpful utilities to a variety of
different situations and help bring the penetration
tester to their full potential.
Logger++
Use this plugin to log and monitor your attacks from
e.g., scanner and more. Sort by status-code and do
an extra inspection on server 500 errors. When you
have done inspections, clear the logs.
Turbo Intruder
Python scriptable interface where one can achieve
custom functionality and very high speeds of HTTP
requests through http pipelining.
Taborator
Quickly add and monitor Burp collaborator
interactions.

Utilities

The REST API can be enabled in user options. It
will by default be enabled on
http://127.0.0.1:1337/. It supports interaction
via web-application too, not just CLI. Below is a
list of endpoints via their URL and the respective
cURL command to use them.
The API can be especially useful when you need
to send a consolidated list of URLs from a
different tool to the scan engine, or perhaps use
Burp Suite in headless mode.
To open Burp Suite in headless mode run it with
the following arguments:
java -jar -Xmx4g -
Djava.awt.headless=true
/path/to/burp.jar
Get a list of defined issues:
http://localhost:1337/knowledge_base/i
ssue_definitions
curl -vgw "\n" -X GET
'http://127.0.0.1:1337/v0.1/knowledge_
base/issue_definitions'
Scan a URL with the Active Scanner (vulnerability scanner):
http://localhost:1337/scan
curl -vgw "\n" -X POST
'http://127.0.0.1:1337/v0.1/scan' -d
'{"urls":["http://target.tgt/scanTarge
t1","http://target.tgt/scanTarget2"]}'
Check the status and progress of a given scan:
http://localhost:1337/scan/task_id
curl -vgw "\n" -X GET
'http://127.0.0.1:1337/v0.1/scan/mytas
k_identifier'

HTTP Request Smuggler
This is an extension for Burp Suite designed to
help you launch HTTP Request Smuggling
attacks.
Active scan++
Allows us to find more vulnerabilities in terms of
suspicious input transformation, XML input
handling, host header attacks and more.
Retire.js
Finds outdated JavaScript and links to the
relevant CVE's for your investigations.

Hunting for Vulnerabilities 2/2

SAML-Raider
Useful to inspect SAML messages, edit and re-
sign them.
JSON Web Tokens
Lets you decode and manipulate JSON web
tokens on the fly, check their validity and
automate common attacks.
Autorize
Detect if scripts are accessible via different roles
or unauthenticated in the web-application.

Authorization and Authentication