# 69. Perspective of a Cyber Attack


---
*Page 1*


## P
## O
## S
## T
## E
## R

## i c s . s a n s . o r g

### JOIN THE ICS COMMUNITY
### https://ics-community.sans.org/signup

ICS-PSTR-ATTACK-0117-v1

## Perspectives
## of a
## Cyber Attack

## What Will Your Attack Look Like?

## Take Action!

## Disruption Activities

## Cyber Maturity Variables

## 2

## ICS defenders must consider
## opportunities to disrupt
## adversarial actions with
## the goal of minimizing the
## impact of the attack on
## the process or operation.

## Effect of Attack

## The adversary tactics,
## techniques, and procedures
## (TTP) used in your attack will
## be influenced by the maturity
## of your cybersecurity program,
## the effectiveness of your
## processes, and the capabilities
## of your defenders.

## System Variables

## 1

## WORKFORCE

## GOVERNANCE

SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
• Patching
• Change control
• Monitoring
• Alerting
• Malware protection
• Account management

NETWORK
ARCHITECTURE
• Segmentation approaches
• Perimeter defense
• IDS
• Managed network switches
• Data diodes
• Site-to-site encryption
• Centralized logging system

SYSTEM VENDOR

In many cases,
vendor-specific design
criteria will determine
system requirements

APPLICATIONS
Third-party
applications required
for operational
function

INFRASTRUCTURE
• Physical system
• Design decisions
• Operating procedures
• Control philosophy
• Operating system
• Virtualization
• Directory services

## Your cyber environment includes many elements specific
## to your implementation, engineering, and operational
## needs. Those elements combine to create a unique
## environment to defend and protect.

## System Variables
## The various cyber, physical, and support
## components found in an environment
## 1

## 2

## 3

## 4

## 5

## Cyber Maturity
## Variables
## Organization culture, investment, and
## management programs that shape
## cybersecurity capability

## Adversary
## Capabilities

## Adversary
## Intent

## External
## Drivers

## Adversary campaigns often use similar and
## recognizable techniques.  As an ICS defender, your
## defensive actions (or lack of actions) will determine
## what your next attack will look like.

## Your actions as the system owner will affect the
## attacker’s strategy and possibly the outcome.

INVENTORY
Know your assets:
HW, SW, and
configuration

ACCESS
CONTROL
Electronic and
physical

SYSTEM
HARDENING
Asset configuration
limited to required
elements

EVENT AND
INCIDENT
RESPONSE
Logging, monitoring,
and responding to
events of interest

MALWARE
DEFENSE
Protection and
prevention

ACCOUNT
MANAGEMENT

Individual, shared,
and default

RECOVERY
CAPABILITIES

Operational
functions, and
individual assets

WORKFORCE
Staffing investments
and training

## Defender Actions
## Focused on Minimizing
## the Effect of the Attack

## Altering any element affects the overall security
## of the system, with each element dependent upon
## other elements in the overall system.

## WORKFORCE

## GOVERNANCE

### FOUNDATION
### Invest in people

### FOUNDATION
### Develop sound policies
### and procedures

### TECHNOLOGY
### Adopt and utilize technology
### to improve security

### Organizations at this
### maturity level are proactively
### monitoring and responding
### to potential attacks with
### Active Defense techniques to
### defend the enterprise and
### ICS environments.

### What an attack at this maturity will look like:
### • Relatively silent
### • Relies on external communications paths
### with trusted parties
### • May utilize zero-day elements
### • Targeted organization will likely identify
### the attack

### OPTIMIZED STAGE

### Organizations at this
### maturity level may have
### already undergone an
### enterprise-targeted Stage-1
### attack or an ICS-focused
### Stage-2 attack and are
### working on mitigation.

### What an attack at this maturity will look like:
### • Movement throughout the environment using
### in-place tools and software
### • C2 channel hidden in trusted
### communications
### • Targeted organization or external party may
### identify the attack

### DEFINED STAGE

0

20

40
60

80

100

0

### Organizations at this
### maturity level may be
### unaware of an ongoing
### prolonged enterprise-
### targeted attack with
### potential elements of
### an ICS-focused attack.

### What an attack at this maturity will look like:
### • Information exfiltrated
### • Multiple access points obtained
### • Privileged accounts obtained
### • External party or adversary may identify
### the attack

### INITIAL STAGE

---
*Page 2*


## Building a bridge from
## Stage 1 to Stage 2

## System
## Variables
## 1

## 2

## 3

## 4

## 5

## Cyber Maturity
## Variables

## Adversary Capabilities
##  As an ICS defender, you can’t control whether your
## organization becomes the target of a capable adversary.

## Adversary Methods
##  ICS defenders do not control the intent, objectives,
## or scope of the campaign.

## External Drivers
##  Adversary objectives and scope can be fluid and may change
## with external drivers such as geopolitical or economic events.

## Adversary Methods

## 4

## Stage 1:
## Cyber Intrusion Preparation and Execution
## Stage 2:
## ICS Attack Development and Execution

Stage 1 is based on the Cyber Kill Chain® model from Lockheed Martin

### INSTALL/EXECUTE

### DISCOVERY

### LAUNCH

### MOVEMENT

### EXFILTRATE

### CAPTURE

### CLEAN/DEFEND

### COLLECT

## MANAGEMENT & ENABLEMENT

## C2

## PLANNING

## RECONNAISSANCE
## ATTACK DEVELOPMENT
## & TUNING

## DEVELOP

## VALIDATION

## TEST
## PREPARATION

## WEAPONIZATION

## TARGETING

## CYBER INTRUSION

## ATTEMPT

## SUCCESS
## EXPLOIT

## DELIVERY

## INSTALL/MODIFY
## ICS ATTACK

## INSTALL/MODIFY

## DELIVER

## EXECUTE ICS ATTACK

### ENABLING ATTACK

### TRIGGER
### DELIVER

### INITIATING ATTACK

### MODIFY
### INJECT

### SUPPORTING ATTACK

### HIDE
### AMPLIFY

REMOTE ACCESS
• Vendors
• Support personnel
• Alternate sites
• Dial-up
• Waterholing
• Social engineering

SYSTEM MGMT
• Patching
• Monitoring
• Alerting
• Backups
• Configuration
• Change management

SYSTEM USE
• Data historians
• Environmental reporting
• Process performance
• Billing
• Metering

PLAN A
Utilize existing
connections,
credentials, and tools

PLAN B
Install tools, escalate
privileges, and
manipulate the
environment

PLAN C
Utilize physical access
approaches to deliver
autonomous attacks or
“phone home” when
connectivity allows

## SUCCESSES
• Information sharing following Ukraine electric system attack
• Information sharing following German steelmaker attack
• Emerging and improving standards and certifications

## FAILURES
• Not patching assets
• No inventory of ICS components
• Lack of segmentation
• Internet-facing devices
• Auto run and unapproved removable
media use
• No antvirus or malicious code detection
• No logging
• No monitoring

## OUT OF
## BALANCE
• Important opportunities to share,
learn, and improve

## Cyber

## Scale

## External Drivers

## 5

## Adversary campaigns often
## use similar and recognizable
## techniques.  As an ICS defender,
## your defensive actions (or lack of
## actions) will determine what your
## next attack will look like.

## Seven Habits of an Effective APT

## Flexibility
## Target environments change –
## maintain a variety of accessible tools
## and capabilities to adapt to changes.

## Understanding Human Behavior
## Targeted employees generally have a desire to do a
## good job and help others, but they typically do not
## assess technical risks very well and may have a limited
## understanding of the interconnectedness of cyber systems.
## Test to Win
## Validating the exploits will achieve
## desired outcomes in target environment.
## Limit damage to non-target environments.

## Lead
## Stay several steps ahead of the ICS defender.
## Anticipate defensive responses upon discovery
## to ensure continuation of attack.

## Execute
## Perform final-stage attacks systematically, create
## collateral impacts to confound and confuse recovery efforts,
## and follow up on ICS defender’s defensive actions.

## Start with the Why
## Define the goal of the campaign and what success looks like:
## data sets, project files, operational data, and capability demonstration.

## “Adversaries have managers
## and PowerPoint too”
### -Robert M. Lee

## Adversary Capabilities

## 3

## Avoid Discovery by Appearing Normal
## Eliminate reliance on initial attack footholds and blend in to behave
## like a trusted user utilizing existing communication paths and tools.

## SUSTAINMENT, ENTRENCHMENT
## DEVELOPMENT & EXECUTION

## ACT